Title: Beyond Decodability: Reconstructing Language Model Representations with an Encoding Probe

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.00607v1

Published Time: Mon, 04 May 2026 01:08:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Beyond Decodability: Reconstructing Language Model Representations with an Encoding Probe 

## Gaofei Shen 1 Martijn Bentum 2 Tom Lentz 1 Afra Alishahi 1 Grzegorz Chrupała 1

> 1

## Tilburg University, 2Radboud University 

## {g.shen, a.alishahi, t.o.lentz}@tilburguniversity.edu martijn.bentum@ru.nl , grzegorz@chrupala.me 

## Abstract 

Probing is widely used to study which features can be decoded from language model represen-tations. However, the common decoding probe approach has two limitations that we aim to solve with our new encoding probe approach: contributions of different features to model rep-resentations cannot be directly compared, and feature correlations can affect probing results. We present an E NCODING PROBE that reverses this direction and reconstructs internal repre-sentations of models using interpretable fea-tures. We evaluate this method on text and speech transformer models, using feature sets spanning acoustics, phonetics, syntax, lexicon, and speaker identity. Our results suggest that speaker-related effects vary strongly across dif-ferent training objectives and datasets, while syntactic and lexical features contribute inde-pendently to reconstruction. These results show that the E NCODING PROBE provides a com-plementary perspective on interpreting model representations beyond decodability. 

## 1 Introduction 

Most current approaches to processing speech and text are based on deep learning architectures and especially large transformer models. While these systems work very well in many applications, they are large and complicated enough that understand-ing and controlling their function in detail becomes challenging. A standard approach to analyzing deep learning models is based on probing the rep-resentations which emerge in these systems. More specifically, a researcher would come up with a set of hypotheses about what kinds of information a model can be plausibly expected to encode and then attempt to systematically extract that information from activation patterns in different components of the system. 

1.1 Decoding probe and its limitations 

This classic probing approach, which we refer to in the rest of the paper as D ECODING PROBE , can tell us whether a specific information type can be reliably extracted or decoded from a model’s repre-sentations. This approach offers valuable insights, and can be indispensable, for example when we want to know whether a model stores sensitive in-formation such as speaker identity that has privacy implications. However, this approach has two im-portant limitations that we aim to solve with our new E NCODING PROBE approach. 

Relative feature contributions. Suppose we are interested in the encoding of speaker identity versus phonetics in the activation patterns of a model of spoken language. We train two D ECOD - 

> ING

PROBES , one mapping activation patterns to speaker IDs and the other one mapping those same activation patterns to phone labels. We may then recover speaker IDs with (e.g.) 95% accuracy and phone labels with 58% accuracy. What can we conclude about the relative importance of these two features? Nothing definitive: the two numbers are not directly comparable, as they depend on the number of labels and their distribution in the two classification tasks. 

Feature correlations. Consider a further prob-lematic scenario: we are interested in the encoding of grammatical categories in a language model. We train a probing classifier which maps activation patterns to the grammatical category label for the current token. The classifier performs at 85% accu-racy and we conclude that grammatical category is encoded in model representations. However, this conclusion may be misleading if we do not control for correlated features . Word identity and gram-matical category are highly correlated: many words occur almost exclusively with a single grammatical category. As a result, the probe may rely primarily 1

> arXiv:2605.00607v1 [cs.CL] 1 May 2026

on information about word identity present in the representations, and predict grammatical categories as a by-product of their correlation with specific words. The probe’s performance may reflect the model’s encoding of lexical identity rather than grammatical category itself. 

1.2 Reversing the direction of probing 

Within NLP, the terms probe and probing classifier 

have often been used in a narrow sense, as a classi-fier which maps an intermediate representation X

from a target model to some (linguistic) property of interest Y (e.g., Belinkov, 2022). However, two assumptions in this definition can (and should) be dropped. First, the mapping need not take the form of a classifier since the targeted property need not be categorical. More fundamentally, the mapping need not be in the direction from model represen-tation X to property of interest Y , f : X → Y ,but could be in the reverse direction g : Y → X.Within neuroscience this reverse direction of prob-ing, known as brain encoding, is widely used and well understood (Ivanova et al., 2021). Here we call the type of probe formulated as f : X → Y

a D ECODING PROBE , and the one formulated as 

g : Y → X an E NCODING PROBE .We argue that the two directions of probing an-swer complementary sets of questions about the na-ture of neural representations, and they have quite different affordances in terms of how they can be implemented and applied. Below, we discuss the advantages of the E NCODING PROBE for address-ing the two main challenges highlighted before. 

1.2.1 Quantifying feature contributions 

Consider again comparing the contribution of two separate features to the representations of a spo-ken language model. We can operationalize this comparison in terms of explaining the amount of variance in these representations. Using an E N- 

> CODING

PROBE , we can fit a regression model to reconstruct activation patterns X based on a num-ber of interpretable features Y , which include both speaker IDs Ysid and phone labels Yph , formulated as g : Y → X. We can now ablate the full probe, removing each feature of interest in turn: first, 

g1 : Y \ Ysid → X, and second, g2 : Y \ Yph → X.Let E(g) be the measure of reconstruction error for probe g. Then the increase in error due to ablating each feature, E(gi) − E(g), gives us a direct mea-sure of the relative contribution of each feature to the model representation, over and above the other features. We may well find that the contribution of phone labels is higher than that of speaker labels, even if the latter are easier to decode. 

1.2.2 Controlling for correlated features 

Reconsider the question of whether grammatical categories are encoded in a language model. By employing an E NCODING PROBE , we can control for correlated features: our full model g : Y → X

contains multiple, potentially correlated, sources of information, including word identities Yw and grammatical category labels Yg. We can ablate each feature separately, as well as both together, and measure the resulting change in reconstruction error. This allows us to assess the conditional con-tribution of each feature, while accounting for their correlation. We may find that removing Yg does not increase reconstruction error, whereas remov-ing Yw does. This would indicate that Yg does not provide additional information beyond what is al-ready captured by Yw, even though grammatical labels may be easy to recover from the model’s representations due to their correlation with word identity. Conversely, if ablating Yg does increase reconstruction error, this indicates that grammatical category contributes information to the representa-tions that is not fully explained by word identity. No doubt many readers recognize that in the above vignettes we are describing standard tools and insights of regression analysis, applied to the specific case of analyzing model representations. This connection to well-understood statistical meth-ods is indeed one of the main attractions of the ENCODING PROBE formulation. In the remainder of the paper we apply the E N- 

> CODING

PROBE to a set of speech and text trans-former models with controlled feature ablations. We focus on syntactic and lexical features in both modalities, and on speaker identity, phonetic, and acoustic features in speech models. Overall, the results demonstrate the value of the E NCODING 

PROBE for measuring relative contributions while controlling for correlated features. 

## 2 Literature 

Probing has been a cornerstone in the interpretabil-ity literature since the early days of its development (Alain and Bengio, 2017; Conneau et al., 2018; Hupkes and Zuidema, 2018). In transformer in-terpretability literature, the probing paradigm has been used to discover a variety of features encoded 2in the hidden state activations of transformer mod-els. However, Belinkov (2022) identifies several important caveats in probing: probe scores are of-ten hard to interpret and compare across/within tasks; results can reflect probe design choices rather than properties of the target model; probes estab-lish correlation rather than causation; outcomes are sensitive to dataset/task artefacts; and analyses are constrained by pre-selected properties. To improve interpretability of probe results, He-witt and Liang (2019) argue that a control task is needed to ascertain that a successful probe is un-covering linguistic structure from model internals rather than learning the task itself. In follow-up work, Hewitt et al. (2021) introduce conditional probing in order to control for correlated features. Their approach relies on the decoding probe, but compares decoding a property (such as POS label) from target representation only, versus decoding it from the representation paired with a control vari-able (such as word identity). Our E NCODING PROBE , in contrast, controls for such effects simultaneously for multiple properties, while also quantifying their relative contribution to explaining the overall variance of neural represen-tations. Our method does not address other caveats associated with probing. While enabling control for correlated features, the E NCODING PROBE re-mains observational and not interventional. Hence it cannot establish causal structure among the inves-tigated variables or their role in the computations carried out by the model. Complementary representational analysis meth-ods such as Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) (Hotelling, 1936) and Representational Similar-ity Analysis (RSA) (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008) are not directional and sometimes do not even require learnable parameters. Research using these meth-ods often yields results corroborating those of prob-ing on the encoding of specific features in the hid-den layers of language models (Chrupała and Al-ishahi, 2019; Pasad et al., 2021; de Heer Kloots et al., 2025), but does not address the two main challenges we focus on here (i.e. comparison of different features and controlling of correlation be-tween features). 

2.1 Encoding of speaker identity 

Probing experiments have shown that various fea-tures can be decoded from the internal represen-tations of models such as wav2vec2 (Baevski et al., 2020), including phonetic (Ma et al., 2021; De La Fuente and Jurafsky, 2024; Cormac English et al., 2022) and prosodic features (Bentum et al., 2025) as well as speaker identity (Chiu et al., 2026). Human listeners process speaker identity sepa-rately from linguistically relevant information (Lee et al., 2019), suggesting that speech models may also disentangle representations of these two infor-mation types. Liu et al. (2023) and Gubian et al. (2025) show evidence that while speaker identity can be decoded from the wav2vec2 model’s inter-nal hidden states, the subspace it occupies is or-thogonal to that of phonetic and tonal information. Our E NCODING PROBE can provide further insight by directly comparing the relative contribution of phonetic and speaker features. 

2.2 Encoding of syntactic structure 

In the text domain, simple syntactic properties (such as POS labels, tree depth, constituent la-bels) have been probed for in neural representa-tions since the early work of Adi et al. (2017) and Conneau et al. (2018). More complex syntactic and semantic structures have been shown to be re-coverable from the hidden state activations of mod-els such as BERT, relying on a variety of custom methods (Hewitt and Manning, 2019; Chrupała and Alishahi, 2019; Tenney et al., 2019). Using a probe formulated to specifically reveal relationships be-tween tokens, Hewitt and Manning (2019) find that the structural relationships between two token rep-resentations are highly correlated with the structure of a syntax tree. Further experiments using the same structural probe with curated datasets show that while it is clear that there is some syntactic 

knowledge encoded by the BERT model, it is diffi-cult to disentangle syntax from other confounding signals such as semantics or the closeness of two words in a sentence (Maudslay and Cotterell, 2021; Simon et al., 2025). In the speech domain, pre-trained speech models such as wav2vec2 (Baevski et al., 2020) and Hu-BERT (Hsu et al., 2021) have been shown to encode syntactic information and word identity (Pasad et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2023; Pasad et al., 2024; Choi et al., 2024). However, Shen et al. (2023) note that the syntactic and lexical features are highly cor-related, and the syntactic decodability shown could possibly be attributed to the underlying lexical rep-resentations in the model embeddings. They come to this conclusion by comparing their syntax probe when applied to the target model representation ver-sus when applied to a bag-of-words reference rep-3Model Training Objective wav2vec2 (base) Audio self-supervision wav2vec2 (ASR) Speech Recognition wav2vec2 (SID) Speaker identification BERT (base) Text self-supervision 

> Table 1: Target models tested in this paper.

resentation. The E NCODING PROBE offers a more general way of accounting for such confounds. 

## 3 Methodology 

While the E NCODING PROBE can be applied to any target model, in this paper we focus on trans-former language models of text and speech as our main case studies. We compile a variety of inter-pretable feature sets that can be obtained from the speech audio waveform or text input. We then use subsets of these features to train multivariate ridge regression probes to reconstruct the hidden state activations of the target models. 

3.1 Models 

We focus on a number of classic Transformer mod-els that have been extensively used in previous probing studies. We use the model versions listed in Table 1, which cover different modalities (text, speech) and training objectives (pre-trained only, ASR tuning, speaker identification tuning). Below we describe the basic architectures and variants. 

Wav2vec2 (Baevski et al., 2020) is a popular speech model with 12 transformer layers and 768 hidden dimensions, pre-trained on 960 hours of the LibriSpeech dataset (Panayotov et al., 2015) in a self-supervised fashion. We also test the variant fine-tuned for automatic speech recognition. In addition to publicly available models, we also fine-tune a wav2vec2-base model for speaker identifica-tion using the 100-hour train split of LibriSpeech with the transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020). 

BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) is a classic text trans-former model. We use bert-base-uncased , pre-trained on 3.3B words from books and web data. 

3.2 Feature sets 

The following interpretable feature sets are used in our experiments, each representing aspects of hu-man language in the audio and textual modalities. 

Acoustics. Features directly extractable from the waveform signal (Eyben et al., 2010), including pitch, formants, and MFCCs 1.

Phonetics. Phonetic posteriorgram (PPG) vec-tors 2 (Hazen et al., 2009), representing the prob-ability of each phone label at a given point in the waveform. We use the ppgs Python package (Churchwell et al., 2024) to automatically generate the PPGs from the waveform. 

Speaker. Speaker identity is an utterance-level label. Within the speech signal, it is perceived as the quality of the voice or timbre. We one-hot en-code the speaker label from the LibriSpeech dataset (Panayotov et al., 2015) into a feature vector of speaker identity. 

Syntax. Syntactic features are the grammatical and structural properties of individual segments of the input. We use spaCy (Honnibal et al., 2020) to automatically extract both categorical features (part-of-speech, dependency label) and numerical features (total syntax tree depth, depth of token within syntax tree, sequential position of the word, total number of words in the utterance). The cate-gorical features are encoded into one-hot vectors. 

Lexicon. Lexical information represents the form and meaning of the words in the utterance. We use FastText static word embeddings (Bojanowski et al., 2017) as a proxy for it. These embeddings are non-contextual and thus do not contain sentence-level structural information. 

Full. The combination of all features listed above. The ablations involve removing features from the union of all the feature sets, e.g. Full \ Syntax .3

3.3 Token and frame embeddings 

In classic text probing studies, token or word em-beddings are the base units of information encod-ing for target models (Hewitt and Manning, 2019). When probing speech models, we work directly at the level of frames, which are the basic units ex-tracted from the audio and which the transformer    

> 1The complete list of low-level descriptors from the eGeMAPSv02 feature set (Eyben et al., 2016) can be found in Section A.1
> 2Different representations of the same feature may dis-proportionately affect the E NCODING PROBE more than the DECODING PROBE . See Section A.2 for an analysis of feature representation choice using phonetic features as an example.
> 3Results of correlation checks between feature sets can be found in Sections A.3 and A.4.

4layers of speech models use as tokens. We ran-domly sample frames from a given utterance and look up the corresponding features for that given timestamp. The features themselves are computed on frames, words or whole utterances, as appro-priate, but the model representations always corre-spond to single frames. This obviates the need to pool representations, and minimizes the imposition of text-based concepts on the analysis of models of spoken language. 

3.4 The E NCODING PROBE 

We fit a Ridge regressor with scikit-learn (Pe-dregosa et al., 2011) that takes the union of all fea-ture sets Full to predict the model representation of the corresponding frame. Essentially, the probe learns to explain the variance within the model rep-resentations, and is evaluated on the test split of the experimental data. As our reconstruction error metric, we report the unexplained variance (UV) of the probe, defined as the ratio of residual sum of squares to the total sum of squares of the dependent variable: UV = SS res 

SS tot 

= 1 − R2. (1) After a feature is ablated, a larger upward gap from the Full baseline indicates a greater rela-tive contribution for that feature, irrespective of absolute UV values. The regularization strength 

α was tuned via cross-validation over the grid 

{10 n | n ∈ Z, −3 ≤ n ≤ 5}. We refit the ridge regressor with the same hyperparameter search for every ablation. We use the 100-hour train split of the Lib-riSpeech dataset (Panayotov et al., 2015) and em-ploy a randomized 80:20 train-test split stratified by speaker ID. Stratification is applied only to speaker ID since it is the only utterance-level la-bel we include in the probe’s input. We select a maximum of 10 frames from each utterance in text models and a maximum of 15 from speech models. Silent frames are filtered out. The pre-processing pipeline results in ∼230 k input-output pairs for speech models and ∼180 k for text mod-els. To quantify the impact of sampling frames, we ran the experiments for wav2vec2-base and 

bert-base-uncased with 10 additional random seeds {n × 100 | n ∈ Z, 1 ≤ n ≤ 10 } and found that the 95% confidence interval (CI) width of the mean differences of UV scores across all random seeds was < 0.002 .

A built-in comparison point. We compare each probe to the analogous one with the complete set of features, Full , which by design yields the lowest Unexplained Variance (UV). 

Parallel decoding probe analyses. We also im-plement parallel analyses with the D ECODING 

PROBE alongside the E NCODING PROBE results. Our decoding analyses use scikit-learn Ridge regressors and classifiers that decode features of interest using the frame-level representations of the transformer models. We utilize the same features across both probe types, except that class labels are used instead of one-hot encoded vectors for the classification tasks. We conduct a hyperparameter search using the same parameter grid as above. 

3.5 Design of case studies 

We present two case studies to demonstrate the ap-plication of the E NCODING PROBE : the encoding of speaker identity in models of speech, and the encoding of syntactic features in models of text and speech. Both of these topics have been exten-sively investigated in prior research as described in Section 2, where the D ECODING PROBE has been used to decode relevant features from vari-ous transformer models’ inner representations. As discussed in Section 1.1, in both cases there is another, potentially highly correlated source of in-formation (acoustics in the case of speaker identity and lexical features in the case of syntactic fea-tures) which might affect the previously reported findings. We design two sets of experiments for each case study, using a set of targeted transformer models to demonstrate how the E NCODING PROBE 

offers a complementary perspective that mitigates limitations of the D ECODING PROBE .

## 4 Experiment 1: Speaker Identity 

Here we investigate the relative contribution of speaker identity, phonetic, and acoustic features. We also look at the impact of the tuning objectives of the models on the encoding of these features in their internal representations. 

4.1 Decoding speaker identity and phone label 

Before applying the E NCODING PROBE for this purpose, we first use the D ECODING PROBE to es-tablish a point of comparison for speaker identity and phone labels. We fit linear models to decode speaker identity and phone label from the hidden-state representations of the speech models. As 5Figure 1: Accuracy of the D ECODING PROBE on pre-dicting speaker identity and phone label from frames of model internal hidden states. The dashed line represents the majority baseline of the classification task. 

shown in the right panel of Figure 1, we find the performance of the speaker identity probe increases towards later layers in the base and SID models but decreases in the ASR model (with a dip in per-formance in the middle layers for base). The left panel of Figure 1 shows the phone label probe per-formance increases from the early to middle layers but drops in final layers for the base and SID mod-els and remains high in the ASR model. However, the performance of all probes consistently exceeds the majority baseline for all layers in all models. These results show that the decodability of speaker identity and phone labels varies depend-ing on the training/tuning objectives of the model. The tuning objective of the ASR model pushes the model to normalize across different speakers while maintaining its ability to identify the correct phone label for the CTC decoding task, whereas the SID model’s objective encourages it to maxi-mize its ability to differentiate speakers, resulting in a larger drop in the decodability of phone labels. These patterns in the current findings confirm previous research. However, the results only show that there is enough information in the model’s internal hidden states for the probe to decode these features. Due to differences in the baselines and the levels of difficulty of the tasks, the results of these two probes are not directly comparable against each other, and the relative contribution of each feature to model representations cannot be quantified. 

4.2 Encoding to reconstruct representations 

Now we apply the E NCODING PROBE to recon-struct representations of the same speech mod-els (base, ASR-tuned, and SID-tuned variants of wav2vec2) 4. In addition to the Full probe, we also  

> 4The experimental results for an extended set of models can be found in Section A.5.
> (a) Acoustics and speaker identity
> (b) Phonetics and speaker identity
> Figure 2: Unexplained Variance (UV) for the base and ASR models (larger gap from Full /dashed = greater contribution).

construct ablated feature sets with each of the tar-geted feature sets ( Acoustics, Phonetics, Speaker )and joint ablations of two sets. Figures 2 and 3 show the E NCODING PROBE 

results for the speaker identity experiments (note that the two sets of graphs use different scales on their y-axes). A larger gap between the grey dashed line (i.e. the Full probe) and a colored solid line (i.e. an ablated probe) means that the ablated feature has a larger relative contribution to the reconstruction of the representation. We first focus on Figure 2, which shows the impact of speaker identity, phonetic, and acoustic features in the base and ASR-tuned models. The top row shows that the UV of the Full \ Acoustics 

probe is substantially higher than that of the Full \

Speaker probe, for both models and all layers (blue line is always above red line). The bottom row shows that Full \ Phonetics also scores higher than 

Full \Speaker . These combined results indicate that both acoustic and phonetic features have a larger relative feature contribution than speaker identity in the base and ASR-tuned models. Comparing the results between the left and right columns, we see a smaller gap between Full \ Speaker and Full . This indicates that the relative contribution of speaker identity is smaller in the ASR-tuned model than in the base model. Additionally, in the upper lay-6(a) Acoustics and speaker identity  

> (b) Phonetics and speaker identity
> Figure 3: Unexplained Variance (UV) for the base and SID models (larger gap from Full /dashed = greater con-tribution).

ers, we can see a larger effect for Full \ Phonetics 

for the ASR-tuned model compared to the base model, whereas Full \ Acoustics shows the oppo-site relationship, indicating that phonetic features are encoded more prominently in the internal hid-den states of the ASR-tuned model than in those of the base model. For the comparison between base and SID-tuned models shown in Figure 3, the situation is similar in the bottom layers, but changes drastically in the upper layers. First, for layers 9-12 of the SID-tuned model, Full achieves a very low UV, i.e. it accounts for most of the variance in the target model repre-sentations. Furthermore, from around layer 7 of the SID model onward, both Full \ Acoustics and 

Full \ Phonetics barely show any increase above 

Full . In the same layers the UV of the Full \Speaker 

probe, on the other hand, is close to one. This pro-file of results indicates that the top layers of the SID-tuned model are almost exclusively dedicated to encoding speaker identity to the exclusion of any other information. 

4.3 Decoding versus encoding results 

To highlight the different insights obtainable via the D ECODING PROBE and E NCODING PROBE ,we focus on the especially striking results for the tuned models. We can decode phonetics from the     

> Figure 4: R2of the D ECODING PROBE on predicting syntactic and lexical feature vectors from the frames of target model representations.

representations in the top layers of the SID model with non-trivial accuracy, while at the same time phonetic features barely contribute to the recon-struction of these representations. Similarly, we can decode speaker labels from the top layers of the ASR-tuned model with above-baseline accu-racy, but the contribution of speaker identity to the reconstruction of these same layers is very mi-nor. In other words, D ECODING PROBE detects phonetic structure sufficient for classification, but the E NCODING PROBE reveals that this structure accounts for a negligible fraction of the total repre-sentational variance in these layers. The fact that decodability and relative contribution can diverge substantially underscores the value of the E NCOD - 

> ING

PROBE .

## 5 Experiment 2: Syntactic Information 

In this section we quantify the contributions of syntactic versus lexical information to the recon-struction of target models’ representations, while controlling for correlations between these features, which have been highlighted in previous work. We examine both text and speech transformer models. 

5.1 Decoding syntactic and lexical features 

We first apply a D ECODING PROBE to establish the decodability of syntactic and lexical features separately. Figure 4 shows that syntactic and lex-ical features are much more decodable in BERT (base) than in the wav2vec2 models. However, while the highest R2 score of the probes for both the base and ASR-tuned models appears around layer 7, the pattern from layers 9-12 is slightly dif-ferent. The lexical probe for the ASR-tuned model has a smaller decrease in R2 score compared to the probe for the base model, and the syntax probes show smaller differences between the two models. 7(a) Speech versus text        

> (b) Base versus ASR-tuned
> Figure 5: Unexplained Variance (UV) (1 −R2)of the ENCODING PROBE for the text base, speech base, and ASR models (larger gap from Full /dashed = greater contribution).

5.2 Reconstructing representations 

Figure 5 shows the results of applying the E NCOD - 

> ING

PROBE to reconstruct the representations of one text model, BERT (base), and two speech mod-els (base and ASR variants of wav2vec2) 5. We re-use the Full probe and report additional ablated feature sets with each of the targeted features ( Syn-tax, Lexicon ) as well as joint ablation of two sets. We discuss the main observations below. First, the increase in UV due to ablating lexical features is higher than the increase due to ablating syntactic features: the line corresponding to Full \

Lexicon is consistently above Full \ Syntax , for all three target models. Second, the ablated probes always have higher UV scores than the Full probe, which indicates that lexical and syntactic features each make an inde-pendent contribution in the probe’s reconstruction of model activation patterns. The hypothesis that syntactic decodability is entirely attributable to lex-ical correlations is not supported: the ablation of syntactic features produces an increase in UV even when lexical features are present in the probe input. Regarding the impact of the target model modal-ity, the effect of the ablations is consistently larger 

> 5The experimental results for an extended set of models can be found in Figure 9 in the Appendix.

in BERT (base) than in the speech models, mean-ing that lexical and syntactic features make a more prominent contribution to the reconstruction of the representations of BERT (base) compared to those of the speech models. Finally, fine-tuning on ASR leads to a target model whose representations are somewhat harder to reconstruct in absolute terms, but where lexical and syntactic features contribute more to the recon-struction compared with what they contribute to the base model. 

5.3 Decoding versus encoding results 

The D ECODING PROBE shows that lexical and syn-tactic features are decodable with moderate suc-cess, but only the E NCODING PROBE allows quan-titative comparison of their relative contributions while controlling for correlations. This case illus-trates that the D ECODING PROBE shows whether information is present, and the E NCODING PROBE 

reveals how much of the representational variance it explains. 

## 6 Discussion and Conclusion 

We present the E NCODING PROBE , which recon-structs representations in the layers of a target model based on multiple interpretable features. Our probe enables direct comparison of the relative con-tributions of different features through a feature ablation analysis under a shared regression objec-tive, while controlling for correlated features. We design two case studies to showcase the E N- 

> CODING

PROBE . In the first, speaker identity is decodable across all wav2vec2 variants, confirm-ing earlier findings using decoding probes (Gubian et al. (2025)), yet its contribution to reconstruction is modest in base and ASR models and substan-tial only with speaker-ID tuning. In the second, lexical and syntactic features make independent contributions to reconstruction in both text and speech models, with lexical features accounting for a higher fraction of the variance, confirming that these models encode syntactic information be-yond what lexical features alone can explain. Such observations are only possible because the multiple regression analysis framework underly-ing the E NCODING PROBE enables us to control for correlations between features by design. This framework likewise leads to a direct quantification of relative feature contributions. 8Limitations 

The E NCODING PROBE addresses some of the is-sues with probing highlighted by Belinkov (2022), but new limitations arise and some are not ad-dressed. The probe remains observational rather than interventional: it reveals statistical associa-tions between interpretable features and model rep-resentations, but it does not establish causal mech-anisms. While the E NCODING PROBE framework in itself supports the use of any regression model, our implementation here relies on ridge regression, which may fail to capture nonlinear relationships in the transformer representations. While nonlinear probes might achieve lower absolute reconstruc-tion error, linear probes offer better interpretability and are standard in the probing literature. The en-coding results are also conditional on the feature sets we chose to operationalize the input space (i.e., acoustics, phonetics, syntax, lexicon, and speaker identity). Factors not included in our analysis can still contribute to the probe’s reconstruction perfor-mance. While the frame-level setup allows for a faithful analysis of the representations of speech models, it potentially under-represents long-range structural information. Our speech experiments use read audiobook data; results may differ for spontaneous or noisy speech. Finally, observed feature contributions and interaction patterns may vary with dataset composition and alignment qual-ity. For these reasons, the reported ablation effects should be read as a case study, rather than as an exhaustive characterization of internal representa-tions of the target models tested. 

## References 

Yossi Adi, Einat Kermany, Yonatan Belinkov, Ofer Lavi, and Yoav Goldberg. 2017. Fine-grained Analysis of Sentence Embeddings Using Auxiliary Prediction Tasks. In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations .Guillaume Alain and Yoshua Bengio. 2017. Under-standing intermediate layers using linear classifier probes. International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations. Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. 2020. Wav2vec 2.0: A Framework for Self-Supervised Learning of Speech Representa-tions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 12449–12460. Curran As-sociates, Inc. Yonatan Belinkov. 2022. Probing Classifiers: Promises, Shortcomings, and Advances. Computational Lin-guistics , 48(1):207–219. Martijn Bentum, Louis ten Bosch, and Tomas O. Lentz. 2025. Word stress in self-supervised speech models: A cross-linguistic comparison. In Proc. Interspeech 2025 , pages 251–255. Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Enriching Word Vectors with Subword Information. Transactions of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics , 5:135–146. Aemon Yat Fei Chiu, Kei Ching Fung, Roger Tsz Yeung Li, Jingyu Li, and Tan Lee. 2026. A Large-Scale Probing Analysis of Speaker-Specific Attributes in Self-Supervised Speech Representations. Preprint ,arXiv:2501.05310. Kwanghee Choi, Ankita Pasad, Tomohiko Nakamura, Satoru Fukayama, Karen Livescu, and Shinji Watan-abe. 2024. Self-Supervised Speech Representations are More Phonetic than Semantic. In Proc. Inter-speech 2024 , pages 4578–4582. Grzegorz Chrupała and Afra Alishahi. 2019. Corre-lating Neural and Symbolic Representations of Lan-guage. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 2952–2962, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Cameron Churchwell, Max Morrison, and Bryan Pardo. 2024. High-Fidelity Neural Phonetic Posteriorgrams. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing Workshops (ICAS-SPW) , pages 823–827, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. IEEE. Alexis Conneau, German Kruszewski, Guillaume Lam-ple, Loïc Barrault, and Marco Baroni. 2018. What you can cram into a single $&!#* vector: Probing sentence embeddings for linguistic properties. In 

Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2126–2136, Melbourne, Aus-tralia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Patrick Cormac English, John D. Kelleher, and Julie Carson-Berndsen. 2022. Domain-Informed Probing of wav2vec 2.0 Embeddings for Phonetic Features. In Proceedings of the 19th SIGMORPHON Workshop on Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology , pages 83–91, Seattle, Washington. Association for Computational Linguistics. Marianne de Heer Kloots, Hosein Mohebbi, Charlotte Pouw, Gaofei Shen, Willem Zuidema, and Martijn Bentum. 2025. What do self-supervised speech mod-els know about Dutch? Analyzing advantages of language-specific pre-training. In Proc. Interspeech 2025 , pages 256–260. Anton De La Fuente and Dan Jurafsky. 2024. A layer-wise analysis of Mandarin and English suprasegmen-tals in SSL speech models. In Interspeech 2024 ,pages 1290–1294. ISCA. 

9Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. Florian Eyben, Klaus R. Scherer, Bjorn W. Schuller, Johan Sundberg, Elisabeth Andre, Carlos Busso, Laurence Y. Devillers, Julien Epps, Petri Laukka, Shrikanth S. Narayanan, and Khiet P. Truong. 2016. The Geneva Minimalistic Acoustic Parameter Set (GeMAPS) for Voice Research and Affective Com-puting. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing ,7(2):190–202. Florian Eyben, Martin Wöllmer, and Björn Schuller. 2010. Opensmile: The munich versatile and fast open-source audio feature extractor. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Multi-media , pages 1459–1462, Firenze Italy. ACM. Michele Gubian, Ioana Krehan, Oli Liu, James Kirby, and Sharon Goldwater. 2025. Analyzing the relation-ships between pretraining language, phonetic, tonal, and speaker information in self-supervised speech models. Preprint , arXiv:2506.10855. Timothy J. Hazen, Wade Shen, and Christopher White. 2009. Query-by-example spoken term detection us-ing phonetic posteriorgram templates. In 2009 IEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition & Un-derstanding , pages 421–426. John Hewitt, Kawin Ethayarajh, Percy Liang, and Christopher Manning. 2021. Conditional probing: Measuring usable information beyond a baseline. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empir-ical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1626–1639, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Re-public. Association for Computational Linguistics. John Hewitt and Percy Liang. 2019. Designing and In-terpreting Probes with Control Tasks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2733–2743, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. John Hewitt and Christopher D. Manning. 2019. AStructural Probe for Finding Syntax in Word Repre-sentations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4129–4138, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. Matthew Honnibal, Ines Montani, Sofie Van Lan-deghem, and Adriane Boyd. 2020. spaCy: Industrial-strength natural language processing in python. Harold Hotelling. 1936. Relations Between Two Sets of Variates. Biometrika , 28(3/4):321–377. Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Abdel-rahman Mohamed. 2021. HuBERT: Self-Supervised Speech Representation Learning by Masked Predic-tion of Hidden Units. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 29:3451– 3460. Dieuwke Hupkes and Willem Zuidema. 2018. Visu-alisation and ’Diagnostic Classifiers’ Reveal how Recurrent and Recursive Neural Networks Process Hierarchical Structure (Extended Abstract). pages 5617–5621. Anna A Ivanova, John Hewitt, and Noga Zaslavsky. 2021. Probing artificial neural networks: Insights from neuroscience. In ICLR 2021 Workshop “How Can Findings about the Brain Improve AI Systems?” .Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Ban-dettini. 2008. Representational similarity analysis-connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. 

Frontiers in systems neuroscience , page 4. Yoonjeong Lee, Patricia Keating, and Jody Kreiman. 2019. Acoustic voice variation within and between speakers. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 146(3):1568–1579. Oli Danyi Liu, Hao Tang, and Sharon Goldwater. 2023. Self-supervised Predictive Coding Models Encode Speaker and Phonetic Information in Orthogonal Sub-spaces. In Proc. Interspeech 2023 , pages 2968–2972. Danni Ma, Neville Ryant, and Mark Liberman. 2021. Probing Acoustic Representations for Phonetic Prop-erties. In ICASSP 2021 - 2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Process-ing (ICASSP) , pages 311–315. Rowan Hall Maudslay and Ryan Cotterell. 2021. Do Syntactic Probes Probe Syntax? Experiments with Jabberwocky Probing. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 124–131, Online. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2015. Librispeech: An ASR corpus based on public domain audio books. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 5206–5210. Ankita Pasad, Chung-Ming Chien, Shane Settle, and Karen Livescu. 2024. What Do Self-Supervised Speech Models Know About Words? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,12:372–391. Ankita Pasad, Ju-Chieh Chou, and Karen Livescu. 2021. Layer-Wise Analysis of a Self-Supervised Speech Representation Model. In 2021 IEEE Automatic 

10 Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU) , pages 914–921, Cartagena, Colombia. IEEE. F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duch-esnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,12:2825–2830. Gaofei Shen, Afra Alishahi, Arianna Bisazza, and Grze-gorz Chrupała. 2023. Wave to Syntax: Probing spo-ken language models for syntax. In INTERSPEECH 2023 , pages 1259–1263. Pablo J. Diego Simon, Emmanuel Chemla, Jean-Remi King, and Yair Lakretz. 2025. Probing syntax in large language models: Successes and remaining challenges. In Second Conference on Language Mod-eling .Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. 2019. BERT Rediscovers the Classical NLP Pipeline. In 

Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 4593– 4601, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, and 3 others. 2020. Trans-formers: State-of-the-Art Natural Language Process-ing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 38–45, Online. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. 

## A Appendix 

A.1 Acoustic descriptor inventory 

This section outlines the feature names for the com-plete eGeMAPSv02(Eyben et al., 2016) feature set extracted by openSMILE (Eyben et al., 2010). We use the low-level descriptors that extract each descriptor at 20 ms intervals to best align with the frame sizes of the speech models (25 ms for wav2vec2). 

A.2 Different feature representations 

To show the importance of feature representation type, we test three different ways of represent-ing phonetic information in both the E NCODING 

PROBE and D ECODING PROBE settings. We trans-form the PPG probabilities into one-hot encoding as well as phone IDs. The results for the probes are reported in Figure 6. The differences in the ENCODING PROBE R2 score for Phone ID and # Acoustic descriptor 1 Loudness_sma3 2 alphaRatio_sma3 3 hammarbergIndex_sma3 4 slope0-500_sma3 5 slope500-1500_sma3 6 spectralFlux_sma3 7 mfcc1_sma3 8 mfcc2_sma3 9 mfcc3_sma3 10 mfcc4_sma3 11 F0semitoneFrom27.5Hz_sma3nz 12 jitterLocal_sma3nz 13 shimmerLocaldB_sma3nz 14 HNRdBACF_sma3nz 15 logRelF0-H1-H2_sma3nz 16 logRelF0-H1-A3_sma3nz 17 F1frequency_sma3nz 18 F1bandwidth_sma3nz 19 F1amplitudeLogRelF0_sma3nz 20 F2frequency_sma3nz 21 F2bandwidth_sma3nz 22 F2amplitudeLogRelF0_sma3nz 23 F3frequency_sma3nz 24 F3bandwidth_sma3nz 25 F3amplitudeLogRelF0_sma3nz 

Table 2: Full openSMILE eGeMAPSv02 low-level de-scriptor inventory used for the acoustic feature set in the probe input ensemble. 

the other multi-dimensional representations of the phone are substantial. The differences between the Phone ID and original PPGs are likely due to the additional representational power of a higher di-mensional vector compared to a 1-D vector. The one-hot encoded PPGs also suffer from loss of in-formation from the removal of the probabilities of other phones appearing in the same timestamp. On the other hand, the D ECODING PROBE results show much smaller differences in the overall trend of the decodability of phonetic features from model internal hidden states. Choosing the right feature representation of the features has a larger impact on the success of the E NCODING PROBE than on the D ECODING PROBE .

A.3 Direct correlations between speaker ID, phonetic, and acoustic features 

We directly estimate the linear correlations between speaker identity and phonetic or acoustic features. 11 Figure 6: Comparison between E NCODING PROBE and DECODING PROBE results using different representa-tions of the same phonetic feature. 

We fit a ridge classifier using phonetic, acoustic and the combined features to predict the speaker identity. The results in Table 3 show that speaker identity is only weakly decodable from the explicit acoustic and phonetic features with a linear clas-sifier. While it is not surprising that there is no correlation between phonetics and speaker identity, we also could not decode speaker label directly from acoustic features. Our acoustic features con-sist of highly localized acoustic descriptors based on a 20 ms waveform segment. The results show that there are almost no speaker characteristics that can be extracted from the local acoustic features. Accuracy Acoustics 0.061 Phonetics 0.008 Phonetics + Acoustics 0.071 

> Table 3: Accuracy of a linear classifier using acoustics, phonetics, and combined acoustics + phonetics to pre-dict speaker identity. The majority baseline is around 0.004.

A.4 Direct correlations between syntactic and lexical features 

We also directly estimate the linear correlations between syntactic features and word embeddings. We fit ridge linear regressors/classifiers to predict individual syntactic features from the static fast-Text word embeddings. Results reported in Table 4 indicate that syntactic category labels (e.g. part-of-speech) are more decodable from the word em-beddings than the other syntactic features. Overall, these results indicate that static word embeddings are not directly correlated with most of the syntac-tic features we include in this study. Metric Score POS Accuracy 0.628 Dependency label Accuracy 0.417 Tree depth R2 0.030 Word position R2 0.012 Total tree depth R2 0.012 Total word count R2 0.009 

> Table 4: Linear probe results on decoding syntactic features from fastText word embeddings.

A.5 All model results 

We also run the E NCODING PROBE analysis across an extended set of speech and text Transformer-based models. We cover different architectures (HuBERT, WavLM, RoBERTa, ModernBERT), sizes (12-layer, 24-layer), and training objectives (speaker identification model from the SUPERB task). The complete list of the extended model set is presented in Table 5. The speaker identification model from the main text is omitted to improve readability of the results. Since the Full probe of the SID model reaches a near-zero UV score in the final layers and dominates the scale, we omit the SID model’s results here. All extended-model runs use the same prob-ing setup, feature sets, sampling procedure, and train/test split described in Section 3, so differences across models are attributable to representational differences rather than pipeline changes. We ex-tract hidden states layer-by-layer (including the embedding/output layer, indexed as layer 0 in our plots), and apply identical ablation-based encod-ing analyses as in the main experiments. Layer indices are normalized to [0 , 1] for comparability across different model sizes. WavLM, which uses a joint-speech enhancement objective, follows a broadly similar trend to wav2vec2 and HuBERT base models. In all figures below we report Unexplained Vari-ance (UV = 1 − R2). The grey dashed line shows the Full probe without ablations; a larger upward gap from this baseline means the ablated feature contributes more to reconstructing the layer’s repre-sentations. Only the gaps between curves—not the absolute UV values—are the quantities of interest. 

A.5.1 Speaker Identity 

We run the speaker identity experiment on the ex-tended set of speech models following the exact configuration in Section 4. The results are shown 12 Model ID Training 

wav2vec2-base speech / PT 

wav2vec2-base-960h speech / ASR 

wav2vec2-base-superb-sid speech / SID 

wav2vec2-large speech / PT 

wav2vec2-large-960h speech / ASR 

hubert-base-ls960 speech / PT 

hubert-large-ll60k speech / PT 

hubert-large-ls960-ft speech / ASR 

wavlm-base speech / PT 

bert-base-uncased text / PT 

roberta-base text / PT 

ModernBERT-base text / PT  

> Table 5: Extended model inventory used for additional probing runs. PT = Pre-training, ASR = Automatic Speech Recognition, SID = Speaker Identification.

in Figures 7 and 8. The results from the base and large variants of wav2vec2 follow a very similar trend, except in the final two layers where the large 24-layer model has a large drop in Unex-plained Variance. At the same time, the HuBERT base and large variants mostly differ in the early layers where the gap between the Full probe and 

Full \ Acoustics \ Speaker is much larger for the 24-layer model than the 12-layer model. Our ob-servation on the ASR tuning objective in Section 4 holds across different model architectures and sizes. Curiously, the SID-SUPERB model does not seem very different from the base model it was based on. This could be due to two factors: SID-superb is fine-tuned on the VoxCeleb dataset, which is out-of-distribution for the current task, and the fine-tuning process may differ between SID-superb and the SID model from the main text. 

A.5.2 Syntactic Information 

Turning to syntactic information, we again see a similar trend in different model sizes: there are differences at the last three layers for wav2vec2 base and large models and first six layers for Hu-BERT base and large models. We also confirm that ASR-tuning increases the contribution from both lexical and syntactic features in the large variants of both wav2vec2 and HuBERT. At the same time, the probe results from the text models are quite stable and similar across all three architectures. 13 Figure 7: Encoding probe UV (1 − R2) score results of phonetics and speaker identity for all models (larger gap from Full /dashed = greater contribution). 

Figure 8: Encoding probe UV (1 − R2) score results of acoustics and speaker identity for all models (larger gap from Full /dashed = greater contribution). 

14 Figure 9: Encoding probe UV (1 − R2) score results of syntax and lexicon for all models (larger gap from 

Full /dashed = greater contribution). 

15