Title: Microsoft Word - Paper R1 Clean.docx

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.22180v1

Published Time: Mon, 27 Jul 2026 00:38:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
# Cycles of Discourse, Speech Dysfluency, and Active 

# Inference 

Thomas Parr 1* , Birtan Demirel 2, Youssuf Saleh 1, Sanjay Manohar 1,3     

> 1Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, UK
> 2Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Department of Engineering Sciences, University of Oxford, UK
> 3Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK
> *Correspondence: thomas.parr@ndcn.ox.ac.uk

Abstract 

Speech is a complex motor and social act. We must not only produce and understand sequences of variable-length 

words formed of ordered syllables but also speak and listen in turn. This theoretical paper introduces a computational 

model of speech production and auditory segmentation based upon sequences of discrete phonemes. The purpose of 

this is to develop a vehicle to test (in silico) hypotheses about the mechanisms that govern loss of speech fluency, 

something that may happen transiently in people who stutter or progressively in various neurodegenerative 

conditions. The modelling here appeals to Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes that provide a useful 

generic formulation for specifying the internal model our brains might use to describe dynamic environments in 

which they can exert partial control and make partial observations. The core features of the specific model used here 

are: (1) a reciprocal mapping from words to sequences of varying numbers of phonemes (2) a common subset of 

states for both speech generation and speech perception. A further novel feature is a social component, in which one 

must infer who is speaking (self or other). We propose a series of hypotheses about the computational mechanisms 

that might underwrite speech breakdown. For example, we demonstrate that reducing the precision in the next word 

introduces pauses and start-of-word repetitions of the sort associated with stuttering. We examine the patterns of 

behaviour and belief-updating predicted by each of these hypotheses, with implications for both speaking and 

listening. Finally, we discuss plausible neural substrates for the underlying message passing that might be amenable 

to interrogation with functional imaging. 

Keywords: Speech; Fluency; Stuttering; Aphasia; Perception; Active Inference 

1—Introduction 

How do we know, if speaking, when we have finished one word to be able to move to the next? How 

do we know, if listening, when another speaker has finished a word and moved to the next? The first 

question is important in the fluent generation of speech while the second matters in segmenting words 

from sequences of sounds when we are listening. This paper serves as a technical note that proposes a 

duality between the solutions to these two questions and that has implications for the fluency of speech. 

It may be seen as complementary to a recent conceptual analysis of stuttering predicated upon active 

inference, in which uncertainty about timings in perceptual cycles takes centre stage (Usler, 2025). Our 

intention is that the illustrative model introduced here will be used in subsequent work to examine the 

possible mechanisms that lead to a breakdown in speech fluency, including stuttering and non-fluent 

aphasias. 

A core problem in both speaking and listening is that there are multiple different timescales in play 

(Arnal et al., 2016; Donhauser & Baillet, 2020). Phonemes progress faster than words, which progress 

faster than sentences. While one could try to account for this by appealing to an internal pacemaker (Cannon, 2021; Parr et al., 2025), or to use temporally deep hierarchies (Friston et al., 2017c; Hasson 

et al., 2008; Heilbron et al., 2022; Kiebel et al., 2008; Pezzulo et al., 2018), the difficulty is that the 

timings for speech are not regular. For instance, different words include different numbers of phonemes 

(Fenk-Oczlon & Pilz, 2021; Grotjahn & Altmann, 1993; Marian et al., 2012). This means one cannot 

naively factorise the states of an internal clock from those of the word they wish to speak or infer they 

have heard. One must account for the entanglement between timings and words (Burton et al., 2000). 

For an interesting account of Bayesian solutions to this kind of problem more generally, see 

(Kaltenmaier et al., 2025). 

There is a vast literature on speech production and auditory segmentation. While it would be impossible 

to do justice to this in the space available here, the following offers a brief overview of some of the 

important advances upon which this paper builds. Models of speech production have emphasised the 

importance of speech gestures (Saltzman & Munhall, 1989), which play an analogous role to the 

dynamic movement primitives (Schöner, 1990) hypothesised in movement neuroscience to construct 

complex continuous movements from discrete elements. Effectively, gestures (or movement primitives) 

represent attracting points for the set of articulators and vocal tract (or effector muscles in limbs). By 

sequentially activating different attractors, one can blend a series of gestures into continuous speech 

production. The way in which gestures implicitly coordinate the articulators determines the ‘utterances’ 

generated (Browman & Goldstein, 1992). 

A further interpretation of these speech dynamics (Perrier et al., 1996) inherits from equilibrium point 

theories of motor control (Feldman & Levin, 2009; Feldman & Orlovsky, 1972), in which the attractors 

associated with each speech gesture are understood as equilibrium points of a dynamical system, that 

are shifted with time to generate complex behaviour. The tendency towards an equilibrium point has 

the appearance of proprioceptive error-correction. Equilibrium point theories have been taken to imply 

that rest positions in speech are themselves equilibrium points and should therefore be achieved 

consistently, but that rest articulator positions (or ‘articulatory settings’) should vary between in 

different languages that require different shifts in equilibrium point—something that has been 

demonstrated using x-ray imaging of the articulators at rest (Gick et al., 2004). 

While error-correction from auditory feedback appears to be an important mechanism by which we 

modulate our speech (Mitsuya & Munhall, 2019), it is only part of the picture. The importance of extra-

auditory sensory modalities in speech perception and production have been demonstrated through an 

innovative experimental design in which auditory and somatosensory consequences of speech 

production were independently manipulated (Ito et al., 2020), demonstrating the importance of 

somatosensory information in speech learning. 

In parallel with a (soft) discretisation of speech generation, into sequences of gestures or equilibrium 

points, there has been development of theories of ‘chunking’ or segmentation of heard speech. These 

theories often depend upon temporal integration windows, the durations of which may vary with 

different oscillatory brain rhythms (Poeppel, 2003)—with different windows accounting for the capture 

of different timescales of speech. Interestingly, the temporal windows of particular relevance for 

tracking speech envelopes appear to be within the theta range (~4-8Hz) (Giraud & Poeppel, 2012), 

compatible with the timescales proposed for speech gestures (Browman & Goldstein, 1992). Recent 

single neuron electrophysiology findings in humans reinforce this, with evidence that the activity of 

neurons in the dominant prefrontal cortex can represent segmented phonetic sequences (Khanna et al., 

2024), and that transient phase-locking of subthalamic nucleus to cortical oscillations occurs during 

syllable repetition with a transient period consistent with the theta range (Vissani et al., 2025) .

In short, both speech generation and segmentation appear to rely upon implicit sequences of events— 

either gestures or temporal integration windows—that occur over comparable timeframes. Both rely 

upon auditory data (generated by self or other), with speech generation requiring an element of error 

correction, also involving proprioceptive (and somatosensory) feedback that has been interpreted according to Equilibrium Point frameworks. Our approach in this paper draws from the sequential 

formulations of speech outlined above and focuses upon a timescale compatible with phonemic 

sequences in both generation and segmentation of speech. 

Conceptually, the model we will present has much in common with motor accounts of speech perception 

rooted in mirror neuron theories of social interaction and mimicry (D'Ausilio et al., 2009; Fadiga & 

Craighero, 2006; Liberman & Mattingly, 1985)—at least, with the weaker formulations of such theories 

(Lotto et al., 2009). Of note, stronger versions of these theories are controversial [see (Cook et al., 2014; 

Hickok, 2009a) for detailed discussions] and our intention is not to directly support or refute these here. 

While we are not suggesting that speech perception requires motor machinery, the formulation on offer 

here implies some of the same neural machinery is in play during both speech production and speech 

perception [see (Möttönen & Watkins, 2009; Watkins et al., 2003) for evidence, using transcranial 

magnetic stimulation, that motor regions appear to play a role in speech perception]. It would be just as 

accurate to say that we treat speech production using a perceptual theory as to say we treat speech 

perception using a motor theory. Our approach also has much in common with other approaches to 

speech generation (Guenther, 2016). Specifically, the idea that speech generation relies upon error 

correction coheres with the active inferential perspective that motor output is a form of prediction error 

correction (see (Bradshaw et al., 2024) for a comprehensive account of the relationship between these 

formulations)—i.e., movement is such that it brings proprioceptive data in line with their anticipated 

values. However, the social element, allowing both speech generation and perception, goes beyond 

purely motor accounts. 

Our treatment of common pathways of speech production and perception is partly motivated by 

observations that people who stutter often find it easier to speak fluently when they are on their own 

(Jackson et al., 2021). The implication is that there may be something inherently more difficult about 

formulating elements of speech in the presence of others. This may be a generic issue in the context of 

social interaction (Rittershofer et al., 2025). The answer we propose is that, given conversations rely 

upon a form of turn taking—something which has been extensively investigated in psychology (Corps 

et al., 2022; Heldner & Edlund, 2010; Levinson, 2025; Levinson & Torreira, 2015; Meyer, 2023; Sacks 

et al., 1974; Skantze, 2021)—in which one person speaks at a time, the cycles that determine the start 

and end of a word are shared between the conversational participants (Friederici, 2002). In principle, 

this means that, in the presence of another, one has the added challenge of determining who sets that 

cycle—perhaps making sense of the benefits of metronome-paced speech in people who stutter, in that 

a metronome unambiguously sets the cycle (Fransella & Beech, 1965; Howell & El-Yaniv, 1987; 

Toyomura et al., 2015). This also means that any computational lesion proposed under any model in 

which the cycle of speech generation is shared between conversational participants makes predictions 

about both speech perception and production, providing opportunities to test predictions in multiple 

domains. 

It is worth saying upfront what we will not address. We take a reductionist approach here to render the 

problems tractable. Specifically, while we aim to capture some of the statistics of speech, we will use a 

minimal set of rules that generate sequences of words, but that do not deal with syntactic rules or 

semantics of a meaningful sort. In addition, we note that various levels of description—e.g., syllable 

level selection and initiation in ‘GODIVA’ based accounts (Civier et al., 2013) of stuttering depend 

upon syllable-level motor programs. We instead focus upon discretised phonemes as the basic unit of 

speech addressed by our modelling. This is not to say that there is something special about phonemes, 

and we note there is controversy about whether phonemes are meaningful units, or are epiphenomenal, 

arising from more fundamental units of speech (see above on ‘speech gestures’). This level of modelling 

does not negate the importance of sub-phonemic levels of description. However, it is justified in our 

setting in that part of our explanatory target is the observed phonemic omissions and repetitions 

observed in some dysfluency syndromes. Furthermore, it can be motivated in light of physiological 

observations that encoding of phonemic features can be identified from the superior temporal gyrus in humans (Mesgarani et al., 2014)—whether or not these are built from more fundamental units. While 

extensions to this modelling to incorporate these are possible, we have kept things deliberately simple 

to try to draw out core aspects of speech fluency. This simplicity facilitates extensions in other 

directions, and particularly the social element of speech—whether one is talking to themselves, to 

another, or listening to another. 

In what follows, we first provide a brief conceptual overview of the theoretical framework—Active 

Inference—we will use. This involves setting out the generic aspects of the generative model 

architecture and Bayesian belief propagation that we will use to simulate behaviour. We then introduce 

the specific features of the model on offer in this paper. These include the presence or absence of a 

conversational partner, which plays a key role in assessing the impact of some social aspects of speech. 

In addition, our generative model allows for a dynamic interplay between sequences of (pseudo)words 

and sequences of phonemes within each word that allows one to segment (or generate) words of 

different lengths. We next demonstrate through illustrative simulations that this same model can be used 

to generate fluent speech, including words of varying lengths, and to successfully segment heard speech 

to identify the words being spoken. Finally, we propose several alternative hypotheses as to the 

mechanisms of breakdown of fluent speech and simulate speech generation and perception under each 

of these mechanisms. For example, we demonstrate that reducing the precision of predictions about the 

next word introduces pauses and start-of-word repetitions of the sort associated with stuttering. 

2—Theoretical background 

In what follows, we appeal to simulations based upon Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes 

(POMDPs) solved using Active Inference (Buckley et al., 2017; Friston et al., 2015). POMDPs have a 

long history (Åström, 1965; Kaelbling et al., 1998) of application to a range of decision making 

problems, and form the basis for ideas of planning as inference (Botvinick & Toussaint, 2012). They 

have been used specifically in models addressing speech (Young et al., 2013) and hearing (Holmes et 

al., 2021). The details of the generic aspects of POMDPs as solved using Active Inference are unpacked 

in detail elsewhere (Parr et al., 2022; Sajid et al., 2021a; Smith et al., 2021), but a brief introduction to 

core concepts (see Table 1 for a glossary) is important in understanding what follows. The central idea 

is that one can model brain function as if our brains are engaged in inference using an internal world 

model (Çatal et al., 2020; Diester et al., 2024; Pezzulo et al., 2024). Under this approach, the problem 

of understanding behaviour is reframed as the problem of finding the form of the brain’s world model. 

Once formulated, any given model can be inverted to simulate belief-updating 1 and behaviour based 

upon standard inferential message passing schemes (Friston et al., 2017b; Schwöbel et al., 2018; 

Yedidia et al., 2005)—whose sparse dependency structure share much with the sparse network 

architectures observed in synaptic communication (Bastos et al., 2012; George & Hawkins, 2009; Parr 

et al., 2019). Such simulations allow us to examine the predictions a given model makes about 

behaviour, the internal brain dynamics that realise that behaviour, and the effect of perturbations on the 

above. 

Table 1—Glossary 

Term Definition 

Bayesian Inference or Model Inversion Bayesian inference is sometimes referred to as a 

model inversion process, in that it takes prior 

plausibility of explanatory variables, combined 

with the likelihood that some data would be 

observed given these explanations, and inverts the  

> 1Beliefs here refer to Bayesian beliefs or probability distributions—these are not necessarily conscious or
> declarative beliefs.

probability distributions to give a posterior 

probability of explanation given data. 

(Perceptual) inference Perceptual inference, here, is taken to be the use of 

Bayesian inference to obtain a posterior 

probability of the causes of one’s sensory data. 

Active Inference This is the process by which one fits a model to 

sensory data both by optimising one’s beliefs 

(posterior probabilities) about the causes of those 

data and by acting upon the world to bring sensory 

data in line with one’s predictions. 

Internal world model or Generative model These terms refer to the prior probabilities 

(including priors about dynamics over time) and 

likelihoods (conditional probabilities of data given 

their causes) that jointly specify a probability 

distribution capturing the way in our brain’s 

implicitly ‘believe’ the world generates our 

sensory data. 

Partially Observed Markov Decision Process 

(POMDP) 

These are a specific class of generative or world 

models that make the following assumptions: (1) 

sensory data at each moment in time are generated 

from hidden (unobservable) states which (2) 

evolve such that each state depends only upon its 

temporal predecessor and (3) upon the choice 

made at the previous point in time. Such models 

are normally equipped with a value function for 

preferred (e.g., rewarding) sensory data. Active 

Inference formulations place priors on choices 

such that the most likely choices maximise 

anticipated value and the potential for uncertainty 

resolution. 

Belief-updating Posterior probabilities are often referred to as 

‘beliefs’, normally of an implicit or unconscious 

nature. As new data become available, these 

beliefs can be further updated via Bayesian 

inference. 

Message passing Just as our brains use synaptic communication, by 

passing messages from one neuron to another, 

many approaches to Bayesian inference also rest 

upon forms of message passing in which one 

passes information between nodes of a network. 

This is particularly relevant for generative models 

comprising multiple interacting variables. The 

message passing scheme used to perform Bayesian 

inference here is known as belief propagation and 

is detailed in Figure 1. 

Sparse dependency or sparse network Sparsity in this context is the property that, in a 

network, every node is not connected to every 

other node. This is a property of brain 

connectivity, but also of POMDP generative 

models in which some variables are said to be 

conditionally independent of others. Conditional 

independence here means that, for two variables in 

a probabilistic model, it is possible to factorise the joint probability distribution such that there is no 

factor containing both variables. 

The form of the models used for Active Inference is typically a probabilistic generative model 

comprising prior beliefs about hidden, unobservable, states and their dynamics, and conditional 

probability distributions that take us from those hidden states to the observable sensory data they cause. 

The dynamics of hidden states are treated as being dependent upon the course of action, or policy, that 

our simulated conversational participant may select. Policies are more likely to be chosen when they 

solicit preferred observations or informative observations that facilitate greater certainty about the world 

(Sajid et al., 2021b). Actions are generated by weighting predictions about observations one step ahead 

in time based upon the probability of different policies to construct a predictive distribution from which 

the most likely observation is sampled for those modalities over which the simulated participant has 

control (Friston et al., 2020)—in keeping with a reflexive form of motor control based upon the 

fulfilment of proprioceptive predictions (Adams et al., 2013). Figure 1 shows the form of the generic 

POMDP structure implied by the above and the (belief-propagation) update scheme for each factor used 

in our simulations here. 

Figure 1 

Partially Observable Markov Decision Process . This figure provides an overview of the form of 

the POMDP structure we use in this paper and the belief-propagation scheme used to solve it. 

The graph on the right uses a Forney factor graph notation (Dauwels, 2007; Forney, 2001; 

Loeliger et al., 2007) to detail the prior and conditional probabilities. Squares represent 

probability distributions, with edges (lines) representing variables. Boxes containing ‘=’ are 

Dirac delta distributions that enforce equality between all connected edges. Filled boxes represent 

sensory data. The relevant distributions are expressed in the upper-left panel. The variable u

represents a controllable path (i.e., alternative transition probabilities under different actions), s

are hidden or latent states, and o are sensory observations. Superscripts for these variables 

represent different factors or modalities. The notation Cat indicates a categorical probability 

distribution whose parameters are a matrix or vector. The σ indicates a softmax function. The 

notations ‘pa’ and ‘ch’ indicate the parents and children of a variable, respectively. For a probability distribution P(a| b), a is the child of b. The middle-left panel outlines the belief-

propagation scheme used here. This is equivalent to a standard sum-product message passing 

scheme. Marginal beliefs Q about any given edge are derived from the elementwise product of 

messages μ passed from each factor with which that edge connects. Messages from a given factor 

are derived recursively from other messages that converge upon that factor. The lower-left panel 

provides an expression for the prior over alternative paths. This is computed based upon the sum 

of a context insensitive prior weight E and an expected free energy comprising the average 

(expectation) of the difference in several log probability distributions. The C normally expresses 

value or preferences but is constant in all that follows. Rather than unpack this in detail here (see, 

e.g., (Da Costa et al., 2020)), we note that the only role the expected free energy plays in this 

paper is that it makes states associated with information gain more attractive and those states with 

greater ambiguity (e.g., those when both parties are talking) more aversive. 

3—A generative model for speech fluency 

In Figure 2, we illustrate the elements of our generative model. These are the hidden state factors and 

the (categorical) values each can take. The states comprise a set of (pseudo)words of variable number 

(we used a vocabulary of 16 words in the simulations that follow), a set of social contexts, and a position 

in a discrete orbit (which specified how many phonemes through the word we are) whose maximum 

length was 8 in keeping with the phonological length of the majority of English words (Marian et al., 

2012). The words were generated by randomly combining a set of simplified phonemes common in 

English, with the constraint that the maximum length of a word was 7 phonemes, single phoneme words 

were vowel sounds, and each multi-phoneme word involved an alternation between vowel and 

consonant sounds (as defined below, noting that we neglect some of the subtleties in definitions of 

mixed and transition sounds for simplicity). Figure 2 

States and transitions. This graphic illustrates the sets of states and transitions that make up our 

generative model, and from which outcomes are generated. These states relate to the three 

horizontal lines in the factor graph of Figure 1. The upper-left states, shown in blue, represent 

the discrete orbit that determines how far we have progressed through a given word. The arrows 

show the allowable transitions between states, such that we progress round the orbit. Depending 

upon the current word, and the number of phonemes it has, the orbit may terminate early. This is 

indicated by the arrows representing transitions that skip to the 8 th state. For any given word, the 

orbit state predicts which phoneme should currently be audible, with the 8 th state consistently 

predicting silence. The upper-right states, shown in orange, deal with the words. The 

(pseudo)vocabulary is generated randomly as described in the main text. The transitions between 

words are constrained to be the identity transition unless the orbit state is 8, so that we can only 

progress to the next word if we have reached the end of the previous word. Otherwise, transitions 

are based upon several possible trajectories, each of which is constructed by randomly permuting 

the rows and columns of a matrix with ones along the leading diagonal. When the social context 

involves our subject speaking, the trajectory depends upon the current controllable path state. 

When it involves listening, the transition matrix is the average of those for all possible 

trajectories. The lower states, shown in purple, represent a social context, in which one can 

control transitions between states where they are or are not speaking, but not whether another 

person may arrive, leave, start speaking, or stop speaking. 

A simple pseudo-syntax was generated by randomly permuting the rows and columns of a square 

matrix, whose dimensions matched the size of the vocabulary, with ones along the leading off diagonal. 

For the purposes of this paper, we generated 6 different such matrices. Treating each matrix as a 

transition probability matrix resulted in several possible repeating sequences of words. When the social 

context involved our agent speaking, they believed they were following one of these sequences of 

words. When they were listening, they believed their conversational partner made use of a transition 

matrix that was the average of the matrices for the alternative sequences, making the sequences less 

predictable. 

One of the key differences here to most (perhaps all) previous POMDP Active Inference models is that 

we employ a much denser set of conditional dependences in the model of dynamics (c.f., the 

factorisation in (Mirza et al., 2016)). Specifically, we allow for the different factors (horizontal lines in 

Figure 1) of the hidden states to mutually influence one another. This means a transition probability 

matrix becomes a transition probability tensor. The reason for this becomes clear when we think about 

the relationship between word and orbit states. For the orbit, we know that the overall length of the 

orbit, and therefore the position at which we jump to the 8 th state, depends sensitively upon the word 

we are currently saying or listening to. This means the probability of going to the i-th orbit state from 

the j-th orbit state depends upon the k-th word currently in play. This probability is represented in the 

ij -th element of a matrix that is the k-th slice of a probability tensor. 

The transition probabilities for all three sets of states were conditionally dependent upon other variables. 

The transitions for words depended upon both the position in the orbit and the social context. When the 

orbit state was anything but the 8 th state, the word transition matrix was an identity matrix, so that the 

word stayed the same until it was completed. In the 8 th state, if the social context meant being the 

speaker, the transitions were conditioned upon a controllable path variable. This allowed our agent to 

select between one of the syntaxes available, and to move to the next word in that syntax. If the social 

context involved someone else speaking, the transition probability was averaged across possible 

syntaxes. The transitions for the orbit state depended upon the current word being spoken. It involved 

a transition from 1 to 2, 2 to 3, and so on, until the length of the word (in phonemes) was reached, and then a transition to orbit state 8. Orbit state 8 always transitioned to state 1. This ensured the start of a 

new orbit coincided with the transitions from one word to another. Transitions in social context 

depended in part on an additional controllable path variable. This determined the transitions between 

whether our agent chose to speak or not. However, the transition probabilities additionally included 

non-controllable stochastic transitions in which the other speaker could arrive or leave and, if present, 

start or stop speaking. 

This definition of the transition dynamics means all words start in the same orbit state but end on 

different orbit states depending upon their length. An alternative is to start words of different orbit 

lengths at different initial positions and work towards the same end state (i.e., for a word of length 3, 

start from orbit state 5 and then transition to 6, 7, and then the space on 8). Both formulations are 

available in the accompanying software demonstrations and result in qualitatively similar phenotypes. 

However, the sensitivities to different parametric lesions differ. While we will primarily report on the 

formulation outlined in Figure 2, where there is a common start position for all words, we will comment 

in the discussion on some of the differences seen when there is a common end position for all words. 

The role of the ‘orbit’ state in our generative model offers an important point of contact to the role of 

perception-action cycles and intermittent sensory attenuation central to active inference accounts of 

motor control (Brown et al., 2013) and emphasised by Usler (2025) in their account of stuttering. Put 

simply, if movement is a form of prediction error resolution, then to initiate movement, one needs to 

suppress belief-updating (i.e., attenuate sensory precision) so that one can entertain the (transiently 

false) belief that one is moving, thereby inducing the prediction error that causes the movement. While 

we implicitly assume, in this discrete-time model, that sensory attenuation occurs between time-steps 

to allow for the action to change from moment to moment, this becomes particularly salient for the start 

of words. Usler’s point that the right timing and rhythm of sensory attenuation is needed to allow for 

fluent speech coheres exactly with the idea that there are only specific points, during an orbit, in which 

one can change word—this is the break between words where there are no useful sensory data to 

determine what is being said, and all depends upon one’s priors. 

This set of hidden states determined the explanatory space available to the agent engaged in the 

simulation. The observations predicted under various combinations of these hidden states were (1) the 

auditory phoneme currently generated (depending upon the orbit state and the current word state); (2) 

two proprioceptive modalities, loosely related to articulatory and airflow sensations (also depending 

upon the orbit and current word state); and (3) a visual modality that reported the presence or absence 

of a conversational partner (which depended only upon the social context state). 

The two proprioceptive modalities and phoneme were related as shown in Tables 1 and 2. These are 

simplified from 2 the concatenated columns and rows one might encounter in International Phonetic 

Alphabet (IPA) tables for vowels and consonants (International Phonetic Association, 2020). These are 

expressed using Latin letters—rather than more standard IPA symbols—for ease of compatibility with 

text generation via MATLAB figures. We will call the proprioceptive outcome comprising the 

concatenation of the row names in Table 2 and 3 the ‘airflow’ outcome, and those comprising the 

concatenation of rows the ‘pharyngeal’ outcome, acknowledging that both names are gross 

oversimplifications and that the sensory data resulting from such outcomes will combine proprioceptive 

and somatosensory information. This formulation means that every phoneme has a unique auditory 

outcome and a unique combination of two proprioceptive outcomes. As each combination of word and 

orbit states implies a specific phoneme, the tables directly define the ‘ A’ mappings from Figure 1 when 

the agent is speaking. For a given word and orbit state, these mappings predict three things: (1) the   

> 2Specifically, and we note there are alternative classifications (for instance, some would define the post-alveolar
> phonemes as palatals), they are adapted from the tables presented in: Wikipedia contributors. (2026). English
> phonology . Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 16/02/2026 from
> https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=English_phonology&oldid=1335940802

auditory phoneme, (2) the ‘airflow’ outcome, and (3) the ‘pharyngeal’ outcome corresponding to the 

column and row identities of the associated phoneme in these tables. Crucially, this also defines a set 

of combinations of proprioceptive outcomes—the empty cells—for which no meaningful auditory 

phoneme is generated. This is key in that it allows for articulatory errors that do not produce a phoneme 

compatible with English. In the auditory domain, mismatches between the phoneme heard and the 

proprioceptive outcomes associated with that phoneme play an important role in determining who is 

speaking. In other words, the proprioceptive signatures of different phonemes can overlap. 

Proprioceptive outcomes are generated only when our agent is the speaker. When both parties are 

speaking, the auditory outcomes (in our agent’s generative model) are assumed to be generated from a 

uniform distribution. 

There are, of course, alternative ways we could have formulated some of these elements. The rationale 

for using phonemes close to those seen in English is partly for illustrative purposes. In principle, we 

could have replaced these with labels p1, p2, p3, etc., and the following analysis would have been the 

same. However, each of these would still have to map to distinct proprioceptive outcomes. Using IPA-

like phonemes gives us a simple and biologically valid way to do this. It also raises the possibility of 

generating audio waveforms, simply by passing the phonemic spellings through standard speech-

synthesis software 3. We have chosen not to constrain the space of words to real English words to avoid 

giving the misleading impression that this generative model is capable of meaningful word-level 

semantic or syntactic structures, reserving this for future work. 

Furthermore, the factorisation of proprioceptive outcomes into ‘airflow’ and ‘pharyngeal’ modalities is 

designed to reflect the coordination of different types of motor effectors in generating speech. We could 

have combined these (technically, using their Kronecker products) into a single list of alternative 

outcomes. This would be mathematically equivalent from the perspective of inference. However, it does 

introduce an interesting dimension to the generation of speech. Specifically, sampling a single 

combined proprioceptive outcome versus sampling the two elements independently makes little 

difference when the proprioceptive outcomes are highly predictable. This is because, when we know 

which word we want to say, and when there is a clear mapping to the current phoneme, the relevant pair 

of proprioceptive outcomes are predicted, and therefore sampled, with high precision. However, when 

there is greater uncertainty, it is possible to sample a pair of proprioceptive states that are incompatible 

with speech (i.e., an empty element of either Table 2 or 3). This captures, in simplified form, the 

complex motor coordination required for speech. To generate meaningful phonemes requires careful 

coordination of, for instance, the appropriate airflow and articulation, and a mismatch between the two 

might lead to a failure to generate the intended sound. 

Table 2 - Consonants                                 

> Labial Dental Alveolar Post alveolar Palatal Velar Glottal
> Nasal mnng
> Plosive fortis ptch k
> Plosive lenis bdjg
> Fricative fortis fth ssh xh
> Fricative lenis veth zzj
> Approximant lryw
> 3For interested readers, this is implemented in the associated MATLAB demos (see software note). However,
> full exploration of this is reserved for future papers.

Table 3 - Vowels             

> Front
> short
> Front
> long
> Central
> short
> Central
> long
> Back
> unrounded
> Back rounded
> short
> Back
> rounded long
> Close Iioo uowe
> Mid eeir oe or
> Open æar

4—Simulating fluent speech and successful speech segmentation 

In this section, we present examples of fluent speech and successful speech perception. The parameter 

settings used as defaults for these simulations are given in Table 4. These are expressed as precision 

parameters. Precision can be understood as a kind of confidence. This is not in the lay sense of ‘self-

confidence’ but in the statistical sense that there is a narrow range of plausible values that a random 

variable might take. While useful to think of precision in terms of confidence, it is important to make 

this distinction in accounting for self-report findings in people with dysfluency, including stutter, who 

(almost by definition) (Neef & Chang, 2024) report they know exactly what they want to say. There is 

a complex relationship between precision and the subjective (or metacognitive) experience of 

confidence—with the two often dissociable from one another. There is an active research field, 

predicated upon signal detection theory, that seeks to understand these relationships (Barrett et al., 2013; 

Fleming & Daw, 2017; Fleming et al., 2010). In this paper, we remain agnostic about the subjective 

feeling of confidence and will focus only upon precision in the statistical sense. 

The choices of these parameter values are largely arbitrary, reflecting a high degree of precision at 

baseline, while allowing for the possibility of changes in speaker (with interruption being less likely 

than speech initiation when silent). We would expect variations in the default parameters to have an 

impact on, for instance, the thresholds at which perturbations result in behavioural changes. This is 

something we will explore towards the end of the paper, in which we compare the interactions between 

pairs of parameters. The lower-case symbols in the table correspond to elements of the upper-case 

symbols in the distributions in Figure 1. Note that all parameters are treated as probabilities in the 0-1 

range except for the e1 parameter, which plays the role of an inverse temperature. This is because we 

treat the distribution of possible word trajectories that are likely to be selected as the softmax of a 

randomly generated vector (from a normal distribution with spherical covariance), with one number per 

trajectory. In all cases, we start with uniform prior beliefs about the word currently being spoken. When 

our agent should be speaking, we set a prior belief that the controllable path for the social state towards 

speaking ( e2) with probability 1. When listening, we set this probability to be 0. In some of the 

simulations, we initialise the environment to include a second person, and in some simulations, we 

initialise it such that the second person is speaking from the start. 

Table 4 – Default parameters                                     

> Parameter Value Interpretation Range
> a11Precision in prediction of phonemes given latent states [0 1]
> a21Precision in prediction of proprioceptive outcomes given latent states [0 1]
> b10.1 Probability someone will arrive if I am alone [0 1]
> b20.1 Probability someone will leave if I have company [0 1] b30.8 Probability someone will start speaking if I am silent [0 1]
> b40.4 Probability someone will stop speaking if I am silent [0 1]
> b50.4 Probability someone will start speaking if I am speaking [0 1]
> b60.8 Probability someone will stop speaking if I am speaking [0 1]
> b71Probability of most likely next orbit state given current state [0 1]
> e18Precision (inverse temperature) in what I want to say > 0
> e21 or 0 Probability that I will start speaking [0 1]

The upper third of Figure 3 shows the output of running a simulation using the generative model of 

Figures 1 and 2 in an environment where our agent is on their own, and where they hold precise prior 

beliefs that they will speak and know what they want to say (i.e., which syntactic path they are on). The 

plots show a pictorial representation of the outcomes and beliefs available at the final time-step of the 

simulation (on the left) alongside the set of probabilistic beliefs formed at each time-step with the 

outcomes presented (on the right). The social state is quickly inferred to be the ‘speaking to myself’ 

state. In the absence of auditory or proprioceptive outcomes in the first two steps, an inference is made 

that it is likely the 8 th orbit state. This prompts a belief at the next step that it should be the start of a 

word, with several words inferred to be plausible. This is enough to predict and generate a consistent 

phoneme, with a second generated at the next time-step. From here on, the simulated speaker is 

confident about their word choices and generates consistent auditory and proprioceptive data. Figure 3 

Behaviour and perception under default parameters. This figure reports three simulations in 

differing contexts under the parameter settings detailed in Table 4. For each simulation, we 

present a graphical representation of the sensory data and inferences on the left, and a plot of 

beliefs and observations over time on the right, which can be interpreted much like the ‘raster 

plots’ one might encounter in single-cell electrophysiology research. Each row of each plot 

represents an alternative categorical value. The graphics on the left, for each simulation, show 

the final frame of the animation that is generated by running the associated MATLAB demo (see 

software availability note). This means that it represents the state of the simulation at the final 

time-step. The ‘audition’ graphic shows the sequence of phonemes generated so far (these are 

presented one at a time). This corresponds to the ‘audition’ raster plots on the right, which show this sequence of auditory phonemes over time. In the raster plots, the ‘silent’ state is the lowest 

row. The ‘airflow’ and ‘pharynx’ graphics indicate different proprioceptive data with red dots at 

different heights. The heights of the red dots correspond to the positions in the corresponding 

rows in the raster plots on the right, with the lowest row being a resting state. The ‘vision’ 

outcome is presented as either an empty frame (nobody there) or a silhouetted figure (another 

potential speaker present). The corresponding raster plot’s first and second rows represent these 

outcomes, respectively. The ‘inferred word’ graphic displays all possible words, with font colour 

weighted by the beliefs shown in the ‘word’ raster plot. The ‘inferred timing’ graphic shows 

beliefs about the current orbit state in red, with the inferred orbit (i.e., word length) shown with 

black links. This is derived from the ‘word’ and ‘orbit’ beliefs shown on the right. Finally, the 

‘inferred context’ graphic expresses the ‘social’ beliefs, with the silhouette on the left shaded 

according to the belief that someone else is present, and the speech bubble shaded according to 

beliefs about who is speaking. A description of the key findings from these simulations is detailed 

in the main text. 

The middle third of Figure 3 shows what happens when we place another (silent) person in the 

environment. Here, we see some subtle but important changes to the agent’s beliefs. First, although they 

mostly believe they are in a social context that involves speaking to another, during the pauses between 

words there is a brief window in which they believe the other might start speaking—leading to the ‘both 

speaking’ outcome. This seems sensible, as the pauses could be consistent with either person speaking. 

However, the clear relationship between audition and the proprioceptive outcomes associated with a 

phoneme while a word is voiced are sufficient to ensure our agent can infer with precision that they are 

the one speaking. 

The lower third of Figure 3 shows what happens if we allow the other speaker to talk and give our agent 

prior beliefs that they are unsure of the syntactic trajectory they would adopt if they were speaking and 

that they do not expect to start speaking. Here, we again see some confusion at the start, but by time-

step 5 there is a precise inference that our agent is listening to another, and an effective segmentation 

of the words and orbit lengths. This demonstrates the plausibility of using the same set-up and model 

for both speech production and perception. 

5—Possible mechanisms for breakdown in fluency 

There are many possible mechanisms we could consider for speech fluency breakdown, and the 

discussion here is only really scratching the surface. However, we will set out some of the broad 

mechanisms that may be relevant and show how one could develop empirical predictions from these. 

The broad categories of mechanism are as follows (with the affected probability distributions in 

parentheses): 

 Loss of precision in the word sequence ( e1)

 Loss of precision in whether to speak ( e2)

 Loss of precision in when to speak ( b7)

 Inappropriate social priors—e.g., expectation of being interrupted ( b5)

 Inappropriate weighting of proprioceptive and auditory sensations ( a1)

Our focus in what follows will be the ways in which we would expect observed behaviour to differ 

according to these mechanisms. We start from the first two manipulations, which both relate to 

controllable paths or policies. As these priors relate to things that our simulated subject controls 

themselves, we can see the effects of these in the absence of another person (we will return later to the 

modulation of these effects by social context). Loss of prior precision over word sequence 

The simulation reported in the upper half of Figure 4 attenuates the precision in the upcoming sequence 

of words, while the lower half attenuates the precision in whether to start or stop speaking. As is evident 

from Figure 4, the patterns of speech generated under these lesions are qualitatively different. When the 

precision is low for the word sequence, we see two features characteristic of breakdown in speech 

fluency. These are the increased gaps between words (seen by multiple empty phonemes ‘/ /’ between 

words in the auditory outcome) and repetition of phonemes at the initiation of a word (‘/e/f/ / /e/f/…’). 

We also see repetition of the entire word given the lack of certainty about which word to choose next. 

Both full and partial word repetitions have been described as features of stuttering (Gregg & Yairi, 

2012; Howell et al., 2006), as have delayed initiation of words (Tetnowski et al., 2021). Long gaps 

between words, as part of a ‘halting’ speech pattern, have also been described in non-fluent aphasias 

(Grossman, 2012)—although this is not to suggest an equivalence between stuttering and non-fluent 

aphasias. 

That loss of prior precision over the word sequence appears to reproduce some features of stuttering 

offers a possible explanation for an interesting empirical finding. This is the demonstration that short 

delays in auditory feedback, of the order of up to about 100ms, can be used to induce fluent speech in 

people who stutter (Goldiamond, 1965; Kalinowski et al., 1996; Lincoln et al., 2006), and 

neurophysiological correlates of this (Daliri & Max, 2018). The relevance of this when there is greater 

uncertainty about trajectories is that delayed auditory feedback—combined with current proprioceptive 

feedback—ensures one always has access to two points along the trajectory, repairing some of the 

uncertainty induced by low prior precision. Intuitively, seeing two adjacent frames of a ball flying 

through the air gives one much more information about its path than a single frame. Similarly, 

information about two adjacent phonemes tells us much more about a verbal trajectory, even if these 

come from two different sensory modalities. 

Loss of precision in whether to speak 

The lower half of Figure 4 shows a different pattern. Here, the loss of precision in whether to start or 

stop speaking leads to gaps between words but, rather than starting each word later, the subject simply 

skips the first phoneme of each word. This is evident from the plots on the right, in which the first state 

of the orbit is often accompanied by a silent auditory outcome (lowest row). Interestingly, the silent 

auditory outcome is sometimes accompanied by the absence of movement in the pharynx or airflow 

outcomes (again, the lowest row for each). Specifically, some pharyngeal movement (e.g., time-step 

11) occurs in the absence of the necessary airflow to generate a sound, suggesting a degree of 

discoordination in the process of articulating speech when unsure whether to speak. One could interpret 

this as an insufficiently precise proprioceptive prediction or command to the relevant muscle groups to 

jointly activate the right set of actions when one is unsure whether they expect to be speaking. This 

combination of discoordination and phonemic omissions or deletions have been observed in speech 

apraxia syndromes (Code, 2021; Ogar et al., 2005; Peach & Tonkovich, 2004). Figure 4 

Uncertainty over controllable paths. This figure makes use of the same format as Figure 3. Please 

refer to the corresponding caption for details. In the upper panel, the inverse temperature was set 

to ¼ for the controllable path through word space, effectively flattening the distribution of 

possible paths. This results in a high degree of uncertainty at the start of each new word, resulting 

in prolonged intervals between words with phoneme and entire word repetitions. In the lower 

panel, the precision of whether to speak was set to ½. This led to a different pattern of speech 

disturbance, with prolonged intervals between words secondary to omission of the first phoneme 

of some words. Additionally, during these omissions, we see discoordination of the articulators 

as indexed by absent airflow in the presence of pharyngeal movement. 

Loss of precision in when to speak 

Next, we will consider the effects of uncertainty in the orbit transitions. Here, because the orbit is shared 

between our subject’s inferences about their own speech and of the other person, we need to consider 

the effects of altering the social context and so present simulations both when speaking and listening. 

When speaking to oneself, speech is well preserved when the precision in transitions ( b7) is a probability 

of 0.8 or above. Speech is completely extinguished if we drop this precision to 0.7. Below this value, 

the subject is silent throughout and unable to initiate speech. This is also true in the presence of another 

person as shown in the upper half of Figure 5. 

Interestingly, our simulated subject has limited difficulty in segmenting the speech of another person at 

this level as shown in the lower half of Figure 5, once sufficient evidence has been accumulated about 

the orbit state in play. Intuitively, this is because hearing a phoneme /ar/, when one’s vocabulary 

contains a word with the phonemic sequence /owe/zj/I/g/owe/zj/ar/, provides evidence for the 7 th orbit state that helps to counteract the accumulated uncertainty in orbit states resulting from loss of precision 

in transitions. The phenotype here shares features with expressive (Broca’s) non-fluent aphasia 

syndromes (Grossman, 2012) in that there is relative preservation of speech comprehension despite loss 

of the ability to initiate meaningful speech. Interestingly, there is evidence that those with such 

syndromes can sometimes sing with relative fluency (Hébert et al., 2003). Explanations for this finding 

range from slower rates of phoneme articulation in singing compared to speech, changes in hemispheric 

dominance, to a restriction of the available vocabulary based upon learned songs. Another plausible 

explanation here is that the rhythmic information associated with music provides strong priors about 

when transitions occur in time, about the beat identity within a bar (which might be tied to orbit 

position), or that melodic structure provides cues that help to resolve the orbit position which might 

repair some of the loss of precision about orbit states under the computational lesion presented here. A 

melody might reduce uncertainty at branch points and removes uncertainty about who is speaking. This 

may explain the promise shown by the use of Melodic Intonation Therapy, which uses musical 

approaches including singing and rhythmic tapping in rehabilitation for nonfluent aphasia (Albert et al., 

1973; Norton et al., 2009; Popescu et al., 2022). 

Figure 5 

Uncertainty in transitions. This figure, using the same format as Figure 3, shows the result of 

reducing precision in transitions around the orbit. This means the subject has a belief that they 

may end up transitioning to the orbit state they expected, but there is a small probability of ending 

up in one of the adjacent orbit states. The result is impaired initiation of speech, but relative 

preservation of speech perception—although note it takes longer to confidently infer the word 

than in previous simulations. Inappropriate social priors—e.g., expectation of being interrupted 

Changes in prior beliefs about the social transition probabilities and specifically changes in beliefs about 

the probability of being interrupted, might be expected to cause interference between the speaker and 

their anticipation of another speaking. We can simulate this by increasing the perceived probability that 

someone will start speaking when our subject is speaking. Interestingly, with all the other parameters 

set as in Table 4, this did not cause any impairment in speech fluency or word recognition. As this is 

not appreciably different from the behaviour shown in Figure 3, we do not include an additional figure 

to display this here. The implication is that a belief that one is likely to be interrupted, on its own, is not 

sufficient for breakdown in fluency. 

Inappropriate weighting of proprioceptive and auditory sensations 

Figure 6 shows what happens when we manipulate the precision of the auditory predictions (i.e., make 

the mapping from word and orbit state to the expected sound more ambiguous). By decreasing the 

expected probability of the most likely phoneme from 1 to 1/16, and distributing the remaining 

probability amongst the other 36 phonemes, we see a few interesting changes. First, when speaking, 

there is a higher probability assigned to the possibility that both parties might be speaking (seen as grey 

shading of the lowest row in the beliefs about social states). However, this does not interfere with speech 

generation. This is because the proprioceptive states remain informative and predictable. More 

strikingly, when listening to another person, there is a loss of precision in the spoken word. While, at 

most time-steps, the true word is inferred to be the most probable, there is much more uncertainty 

associated with this. Qualitatively, this behaviour resembles receptive (Wernicke’s) aphasia in which 

an interpretation of an auditory stream as meaningful words is lost, despite relative preservation of 

speech generation (Buckingham & Kertesz, 1974; Damasio, 1992). 

Figure 6 Uncertainty in phoneme prediction. This figure, using the same format as Figure 3, illustrates the 

effect of reducing the precision with which auditory phonemes are predicted from the orbit and 

word states. When speaking to another, this causes limited impairment in speech generation as 

the proprioceptive outcomes are sufficient to provide feedback on what is being said. However, 

when listening, our simulated subject becomes much less confident both about the word currently 

in play and the orbit states. 

Figure 7 

Interactions of parameters and social context. This figure illustrates the effects of manipulating 

the e1 (x-axis) and e2 (y-axis) parameters in the context of speaking to oneself (left) or speaking 

to another silent party (right). The shading of each element gives the average length of pause 

between words in a 32 time-step period. These simulated data have been smoothed using a 3x3 

moving average kernel. Note the symmetry of the left plot across the diagonal, with the symmetry 

broken in the right. The implication is that, if a fluency deficit is a result of changes in these two 

parameters, one should be able to recover these parameter values from any given measurement 

of the average lengths of pauses between words in the presence or absence of conversational 

partners. 

A final simulation result is shown in Figure 7. This is to illustrate the importance of interactions between 

parameters and social settings. In constructing these figures, we simulated 32 time-steps in the presence 

or absence of a second person who, when present, remained silent throughout. We repeated this for 

different values of the two e parameters from Table 4. For each combination of parameters and social 

context, we computed the average length of the gap between words, excluding any pause before the 

first word is spoken. This is a coarse measure, which includes phoneme omissions as well as ‘halting’ 

and speech ‘blocks.’ However, it makes clear empirical predictions about the speech characteristics one 

would expect given the computational lesions that might underwrite a dysfluency syndrome. First, we 

see that there is an approximately symmetric pattern of deficit when speaking to oneself with severity 

of parameter manipulation (left panel). However, this symmetry is broken once we introduce another 

person, with relative invariance in the effect of precision in whether to speak. Such plots also speak to 

the possibility of compensatory strategies. Mild deficits in precision in whether to speak, or in the word 

sequence, could be compensated for by increasing precision in what to say, or whether to speak, 

respectively. For instance, a well-rehearsed script might help someone, with a mild deficit in precision 

about whether to speak, to engage in fluent speech. 6—Computational Neuroanatomy 

One of the ways in which models of this sort can be used is in developing regressors for functional 

imaging that can help to test hypotheses about the computational anatomy. By simulating the belief-

updating that corresponds to a given behavioural output, and associating beliefs about subsets of 

variables with specific sets of voxels, one can assess whether the trajectory of the belief-updates 

(suitably convolved with response functions) is predictive of activity in those voxels (see, e.g., (Nour 

et al., 2018; Schwartenbeck et al., 2015)). 

It is important to think about the anatomical hypotheses one might wish to test, and the constraints the 

model itself places on the network architecture (Parr & Friston, 2018). Typically, the strongest 

constraints are the sensory and motor elements. We expect auditory (phonemic) input to involve the 

superior temporal gyrus (Liebenthal et al., 2005; Price et al., 1996), and motor output to act via motor 

cortical projections to brainstem nuclei and cervical spinal motor neurons (Kearney & and Guenther, 

2019; MacLarnon, 2011). From here, we have a set of constraints based upon the conditional 

dependencies in the probabilistic generative model. Figure 8 shows one plausible arrangement of this 

network of connections. This arrangement is partially motivated by the pattern of deficits we saw in the 

simulations above under alternative lesions and partly by previous functional imaging and anatomical 

findings (Hickok, 2009b). For instance, there is evidence for a left posterior Sylvian region that is 

responsive to speech perception and production (Buchsbaum et al., 2001) that is a good candidate locus 

for beliefs about words regardless of who has spoken them. The subcortical structures involved in 

selecting between the alternative policies have been omitted for visual clarity but would be expected to 

include cortico-basal-ganglia loops, which notably have a role in acquired (Theys et al., 2013; Theys 

et al., 2024) and developmental (Alm, 2004; Chang & Guenther, 2020) stuttering. It is here that we 

might expect changes in the e parameters from Table 4 that deal with alternative courses of action. 

Figure 8 

Computational neuroanatomy of speech fluency. This figure presents a plausible computational 

anatomy for speech fluency as mediated by the Active Inference model we have presented. This 

is somewhat speculative and represents one of several hypotheses that could be advanced within the constraints of the computational architecture and pattern of lesion behaviours. Beliefs about 

states are represented as bold s symbols, with superscripts o, s, w standing for orbit, social, and 

word states, respectively. Observable data are expressed using the o symbol, with superscripts a, 

p, v standing for auditory, proprioceptive, and visual modalities, respectively. Proprioception 

here is the combination of pharyngeal and airflow modalities and likely also involves an element 

of somatosensation. The u variable represents the actions taken. The subcortical networks likely 

involved in evaluating alternative actions have been omitted here. All nodes are intended as 

relatively course representations of populations of neurons. 

Lesion mapping in speech and language syndromes (Fridriksson et al., 2018) offers another set of 

constraints. As we saw in the simulations, receptive dysphasic patterns, of the sort associated with 

damage to superior temporal and posterior superior temporal regions, emerged when we lesioned the 

connectivity between auditory phoneme representations and word representations. Similarly, expressive 

dysphasic patterns, of the sort associated with lesions to the inferior frontal gyrus and its connections 

emerged when we introduced uncertainty into transitions between orbit states. The functional 

interpretation of the relationship between the frontotemporal parts of the network in Figure 8 cohere 

with ideas about the structuring of words into sentences (Friederici, 2002), in that our ‘frontal’ orbit 

states are essential in segmenting words and timing the progression onto the next word. They also fit 

with evidence that, during more explicitly rhythmic activities, like singing, premotor (precentral) 

regions are specifically engaged (Zarate & Zatorre, 2008). 

Our model encapsulates sensory speech perception and motor speech generation within a single 

framework. It is worth noting that one of the obstacles in the motor theory of speech perception is how 

to account for the double dissociation between receptive and expressive aphasias (Meister et al., 2007). 

Surely, if speaking and listening share mechanisms, then they should not be dissociable. Remarkably, 

active inference shows how these functions can be differentially impacted by specific lesions within the 

model. 

7—Potential extensions and predictions 

We have deliberately formulated the model in a way that can be straightforwardly mapped to 

experimental manipulations. For example, a participant might speak while another person is present or 

absent as indicated by an image on a stimulus display screen. The probability that the other person 

arrives, leaves, and starts talking could be manipulated. Participants could be pre-trained on some 

simple scripts and cued with different levels of certainty about the script they should be speaking from, 

if at all, at different points in time. Previous functional imaging experiments have implicitly 

manipulated precision about what to say in people who stutter using tasks such as sentence reading 

(highly constrained) versus describing a picture (less constrained) (Demirel et al., 2024). Our theoretical 

analysis suggests there may be value in looking at the interaction between these conditions and the 

presence or absence of another potential conversational partner. 

There are several predictions one could test using such a paradigm, including fluctuations in the ability 

to decode words at specific intervals with non-invasive physiological imaging, the interaction between 

progressive perturbation of parameters—such as we might expect in some neurodegenerative 

disorders—and the patterns of deficit both when speaking to oneself and speaking to another, and (based 

on Figure 8) the loci of activity we might expect to measure using parametric regressors in functional 

imaging. 

As an example of the first of these, looking at the belief plots on the right of Figure 4, we see that during 

silence between words, and even during the first phoneme, there is a high degree of uncertainty about the word selected—something that might be amenable to assessment with a

magneto/electroencephalographic decoding paradigms (Dash et al., 2020; Défossez et al., 2023). If a 

relative loss of precision in the word sequence underwrites breakdown of speech fluency, we would 

expect decoding accuracy of the current word in the sequence to drop in the pause between words and 

during the first phoneme of new words for participants with disruptions of speech fluency, relative to a 

neurotypical participant (e.g., upper plot of Figure 3), but be retained during the spoken words. 

The model predicts many quantitative testable phenomena, which require further simulation to pin down 

in specific contexts (e.g., stuttering versus aphasic syndromes). For example, what are the critical 

features that lead to dysfluency? Inherent factors may include sentence branch points, variable-length 

words (Soderberg, 1971), predictability of phonemes, and the unpredictability of another person. 

Further, modifiable factors that limit stuttering, such as rhythm or auditory cues, number of other 

people, and the benefits of filled pauses or discourse markers, could be investigated and may generate 

clinically useful hypotheses. 

A core issue that we have not addressed here, but which would be interesting to examine further, is the 

influence of the vocabulary itself. One might expect greater difficulties with vocabularies in which 

many different words start with the same phoneme. Similarly, the syntaxes are themselves likely to be 

significant here. In the (overly) simple syntactic formulation here, some words sit at the branch points 

between different syntactic trajectories, while some are unambiguously followed by other words as they 

only appear on one trajectory. Even at this very simple level, one could examine the influence of word 

predictability on both fluency and comprehension. However, a more complete account would likely 

need to take account of rapid plastic changes that allow for a more flexible expression of syntax (Sun 

& Manohar, 2023). 

In Section 3, we alluded to an alternative formulation of the orbit dynamics. To recap, we have primarily 

reported on the impact of orbit dynamics in which all words start at position 1 but have variable end 

positions before transitioning to the space between words in position 8. The alternative formulation uses 

a variable start position, but all words end on position 7. This frontloads the uncertainty associated with 

each word, as any uncertainty about the word engenders uncertainty about the likely orbit state 

associated with the first phoneme. Perhaps unsurprisingly, this leads to greater sensitivity to the 

manipulations reported in Figure 4, with uncertainty about which word to say, and whether to say it, 

leading to longer gaps and greater phonemic repetition. A prediction we could derive from the different 

formulations is that, if our brains represent common start timings for words, speech dysfluency may be 

alleviated by external cueing timed with the start of words as this confirms the orbit position. In contrast, 

if our brains represent common endings, external cueing for the last phoneme may be more helpful. 

One way in which the generative model itself could be extended is through inclusion of other (slower) 

levels of the temporal hierarchy that generates trajectories of words and the behaviour of conversational 

participants (Friston et al., 2017c). This would allow one to capture higher order statistics—for instance, 

those of switches between different word sequences. Crucially, explicit modelling of a hierarchy means 

that many of the parameters we have been concerned with at this level (effectively, as independent 

variables that can be manipulated to generate dependent—behavioural—variables) would be 

determined by what happens at a higher level. As an example, how might higher level beliefs we 

implicitly hold about the kinds of conversational partners we might encounter affect the parameters of 

Table 3? If one believes they are speaking to a relatively obnoxious conversational partner, they might 

predict that this person is likely to both interrupt them (high b5), and to continue speaking regardless of 

whether they start speaking themselves (low b6). In contrast, a more respectful conversant may show 

the opposite pattern. This means that, while the parameters of Table 3 can be specified and perturbed 

independently when one considers only a single hierarchical level, it is likely that they will covary and 

may be reducible to a smaller number of independent dimensions. This reinforces the need to consider the ways in which parameters interact (e.g., the analysis of Figure 7) in addition to understanding their 

individual effects. 

8—Limitations 

The analysis presented here is far from exhaustive. For instance, while we have illustrated predictions 

one might make based upon parameter interactions in Figure 7, there are many other interactions one 

could assess and measures one might use to score the speech patterns generated to assess the impact of 

those interactions. One could formalise this using the same scores applied to real speech, including the 

Stuttering Severity Instrument (Riley Glyndon, 1972), Apraxia of Speech Rating Scale (Strand et al., 

2014), and elements of the Western Assessment Battery (Shewan & Kertesz, 1980). 

The biggest limitation of this work is that it implicitly divorces speech from semantics. This is clearly 

a severe simplification that may need to be rectified in subsequent iterations of this modelling. It is 

striking that, even without explicit semantic elements, a rich variety of healthy and pathological speech 

behaviours can be simulated. Arguably, this approach could be licensed by the influential dual streams 

model of language (Hickok & Poeppel, 2004) in which there is a dissociation between dorsal regions 

more involved in the relationship between sounds and their articulation—our focus—and more ventral 

regions involved in the relationship between sounds and their meanings. 

However, this does have an impact on the ability of the minimal model outlined here to capture some 

aspects of speech dysfluency. For instance, in people who stutter, the propensity to stutter for a given 

word is not entirely divorced from its semantic content (Brundage & Bernstein Ratner, 2022; 

Quarrington, 1965). Words with high informational content, that change the semantics of a sentence, 

such as the X in ‘my name is X’, can be associated with greater impairments in speech fluency. As 

outlined above, such points in a sentence, with multiple possible answers (which are also sensitive to 

who is speaking), might reflect branch-points in a linguistic sequence which are inherently more 

uncertain. Capturing communicative intent behind these words requires incorporation of a more 

semantically meaningful language model. 

The visual element of this model represents a binary visual outcome—presence or absence of a 

conversational partner—only. While this was kept deliberately simple, to focus upon questions of 

private versus social speech, it clearly omits visual clues that are very important for verbal discourse. 

This includes things like lip-reading, facial expressions, or even sign-language. One could extend this 

by expanding the number of visual outcomes possible, replacing [‘present’, ‘absent’] with [‘lips 

moving’, ‘lips not moving’, ‘absent’], or even decomposing visible lip movements into phoneme-

specific movements. Again, for our current purposes, the presence of another is designed to introduce 

ambiguity (i.e., one must do additional work to understand who is speaking), but clearly for speech 

comprehension visual clues play the opposite role, reducing ambiguity about what is being said. How 

might this change the results presented in this paper? The most obvious would be the results in Figure 

6, showing something akin to receptive aphasia. In the presence of visual cues that are predictable based 

upon orbit position and the word being spoken, one might expect to be more resistant to attenuations in 

the precision of auditory phoneme prediction. 

Finally, the validity of this modelling approach is only partially established by the results reported here. 

More specifically, there is a degree of face validity demonstrated in the ability to produce patterns of 

fluent speech-like behaviours, and auditory segmentation of sequences of speech, using the same 

underlying model. Of note, both active and perceptual elements of this rely upon sequences of phonemes 

of varying lengths as in real speech, supporting a set of phonemes comparable to those used in spoken 

English, and dealing with multimodal sensory data. This is further supported by prior work 

demonstrating the neurobiological plausibility of Active Inference as applied to POMDP models [e.g., 

(Friston et al., 2017a; Parr et al., 2019)]. The construct validity of our approach is illustrated by the realistic patterns of speech breakdown—capturing aspects of a range of patterns seen in human speech 

dysfluency syndromes—that were obtained through perturbations to model parameters. This 

specifically includes the impact of private versus public speech as seen in people who stutter (see Figure 

7 and surrounding discussion). 

The predictive validity has yet to be established. There are several ways one could approach this. First, 

as one can see from Figures 4-7, we can predict (given specific parameter perturbations), changes in 

both speech production and perception. This means we would predict co-occurrence of these findings 

when they occur, and a dissociation between production and perception would go against these 

predictions. Second, in progressive dysfluency syndromes (i.e., progressive non-fluent aphasia), one 

might predict that the relevant parameters that explain their syndrome will become progressively and 

monotonically perturbed with time. One could estimate these parameters at varying timepoints from 

recorded speech to establish whether this is the case. Third, the generative model implies very specific 

dependencies between variables, which implies specific patterns of sparse (e.g., synaptic) 

communication when inverting this model. In other words, we can make specific predictions about 

network architecture, summarised in Figure 8, and simulate timeseries signals from each node in this 

network. Such signals could be used as parametric regressors in functional imaging, to assess for the 

presence of these same signals during speech and to pin down their anatomical foci. 

8—Conclusions 

This paper is primarily designed to introduce a model of speech fluency, articulated in terms of Active 

Inference, as a starting point for further research looking at breakdown of fluency in people who stutter 

or those with nonfluent dysphasia syndromes. However, we can comment on a few things learned even 

from these initial simulations. Under the hypothesis that our brains use a common representation for 

the words spoken by ourselves and others, and that this comprises a variable length orbit and word 

representation: 

 When one is sufficiently confident about whether they are speaking, and if so, what they wish 

to say, the same machinery can be used to generate speech and to segment words from auditory 

streams of phonemes while listening to another. 

 Loss of precision in the word sequence results in a pattern of whole-word and start-of-word 

repetitions and pauses between words that are worsened in the presence of a listener. These 

features are typical of stuttering. Loss of precision in whether to speak is associated with 

phonemic omissions in addition to increased pauses between words. 

 Loss of precision in sequencing of amongst different phonemes impairs initiation of speech 

with relative preservation of speech perception when listening. Conversely, loss of precision in 

predicting auditory phonemes does not speech generation as it can be compensated for by 

precise proprioceptive predictions. 

 High prior expectations of being interrupted in the presence of another potential speaker is not 

a plausible explanation, on its own, for dysfluency syndromes, but may interact with the 

elements outlined above in causing stutter. 

The novelty of these simulations is that they integrate speech output and perception with social cues. 

Consequently, they make specific predictions about how predictability of language interacts with social 

expectations and precision—which may be crucial in understanding disorders of speech. 

Software availability The numerical simulations presented in this paper can be reproduced and customised using MATLAB 

code (tested in MATLAB 2025a) available from https://github.com/tejparr/Computational-Neurology .

Specifically, the DEMO_Speech_Fluency.m routine will generate animations and belief-update plots 

from which our figures were generated. 

Acknowledgements 

TP is supported by an NIHR Academic Clinical Fellowship (ref: ACF-2023–13–013). SGM is 

supported by the National Institute of Health and Care Research (NIHR) Oxford Biomedical Research 

Centre (BRC), NIHR Oxford Health BRC, and MRC Clinician Scientist Fellowship (MR/P00878/X). 

BD was supported by the Dominic Barker Trust (Registered Charity no. 1063491). We are grateful to 

Kate Watkins for helpful comments on a draft of this manuscript. 

Declarations of interest 

The authors declare no known conflicts of interest. 

References 

Adams, R. A., Shipp, S., & Friston, K. J. (2013). Predictions not commands: active inference in the 

motor system. Brain Structure & Function, 218 (3), 611-643. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-

012-0475-5 

Albert, M. L., Sparks, R. W., & Helm, N. A. (1973). Melodic Intonation Therapy for Aphasia. Archives 

of Neurology, 29 (2), 130-131. https://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.1973.00490260074018 

Alm, P. A. (2004). Stuttering and the basal ganglia circuits: a critical review of possible relations. 

Journal of Communication Disorders, 37 (4), 325-369. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2004.03.001 

Arnal, L. H., Poeppel, D., & Giraud, A.-L. (2016). Chapter 38 - A Neurophysiological Perspective on 

Speech Processing in “The Neurobiology of Language”. In G. Hickok & S. L. Small (Eds.), 

Neurobiology of Language (pp. 463-478). Academic Press. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-407794-2.00038-9 

Åström, K. J. (1965). Optimal control of Markov processes with incomplete state information. Journal 

of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 10 (1), 174-205. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-247X(65)90154-X 

Barrett, A. B., Dienes, Z., & Seth, A. K. (2013). Measures of metacognition on signal-detection 

theoretic models. Psychological Methods, 18 (4), 535-552. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0033268 

Bastos, A. M., Usrey, W. M., Adams, R. A., Mangun, G. R., Fries, P., & Friston, K. J. (2012). Canonical 

microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron, 76 (4), 695-711. 

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0896627312009592 Botvinick, M., & Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inference. Trends in cognitive sciences, 16 (10), 

485-488. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.08.006 

Bradshaw, A., Press, C., & Davis, M. (2024). Active inference and speech motor control: a review and 

theory. psyarxiv . https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/eq4kh 

Browman, C. P., & Goldstein, L. (1992). Articulatory Phonology: An Overview. Phonetica, 49 (3-4), 

155-180. https://doi.org/10.1159/000261913 

Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M., & Friston, K. (2013). Active inference, sensory 

attenuation and illusions. Cognitive processing , 1-17. 

Brundage, S. B., & Bernstein Ratner, N. (2022). Linguistic Aspects of Stuttering: Research Updates on 

the Language–Fluency Interface. Topics in Language Disorders, 42 (1). 

https://journals.lww.com/topicsinlanguagedisorders/fulltext/2022/01000/linguistic_aspects_of 

_stuttering__research_updates.3.aspx 

Buchsbaum, B. R., Hickok, G., & Humphries, C. (2001). Role of left posterior superior temporal gyrus 

in phonological processing for speech perception and production. Cognitive Science, 25 (5), 

663-678. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0364-0213(01)00048-9 

Buckingham, H. W., & Kertesz, A. (1974). A linguistic analysis of fluent aphasia. Brain and Language, 

1(1), 43-61. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0093-934X(74)90025-X 

Buckley, C. L., Kim, C. S., McGregor, S., & Seth, A. K. (2017). The free energy principle for action 

and perception: A mathematical review. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 81 , 55-79. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2017.09.004 

Burton, M. W., Small, S. L., & Blumstein, S. E. (2000). The Role of Segmentation in Phonological 

Processing: An fMRI Investigation. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12 (4), 679-690. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/089892900562309 

Cannon, J. (2021). Expectancy-based rhythmic entrainment as continuous Bayesian inference. PLoS 

computational biology, 17 (6), e1009025. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009025 

Çatal, O., Wauthier, S., De Boom, C., Verbelen, T., & Dhoedt, B. (2020). Learning Generative State 

Space Models for Active Inference [Original Research]. Frontiers in Computational 

Neuroscience, Volume 14 - 2020 . https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2020.574372 

Chang, S.-E., & Guenther, F. H. (2020). Involvement of the cortico-basal ganglia-thalamocortical loop 

in developmental stuttering. Frontiers in Psychology, 10 .

https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.03088 

Civier, O., Bullock, D., Max, L., & Guenther, F. H. (2013). Computational modeling of stuttering 

caused by impairments in a basal ganglia thalamo-cortical circuit involved in syllable selection 

and initiation. Brain and Language, 126 (3), 263-278. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2013.05.016 Code, C. (2021). Contemporary issues in apraxia of speech. Aphasiology, 35 (4), 391-396. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2021.1896108 

Cook, R., Bird, G., Catmur, C., Press, C., & Heyes, C. (2014). Mirror neurons: From origin to function. 

Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 37 (2), 177-192. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X13000903 

Corps, R. E., Knudsen, B., & Meyer, A. S. (2022). Overrated gaps: Inter-speaker gaps provide limited 

information about the timing of turns in conversation. Cognition, 223 , 105037. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2022.105037 

D'Ausilio, A., Pulvermüller, F., Salmas, P., Bufalari, I., Begliomini, C., & Fadiga, L. (2009). The Motor 

Somatotopy of Speech Perception. Current Biology, 19 (5), 381-385. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.01.017 

Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sajid, N., Veselic, S., Neacsu, V., & Friston, K. (2020). Active inference on 

discrete state-spaces: A synthesis. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 99 , 102447. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2020.102447 

Daliri, A., & Max, L. (2018). Stuttering adults' lack of pre-speech auditory modulation normalizes when 

speaking with delayed auditory feedback. Cortex, 99 , 55-68. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2017.10.019 

Damasio, A. R. (1992). Aphasia. New England Journal of Medicine, 326 (8), 531-539. 

https://doi.org/doi:10.1056/NEJM199202203260806 

Dash, D., Ferrari, P., & Wang, J. (2020). Decoding Imagined and Spoken Phrases From Non-invasive 

Neural (MEG) Signals [Original Research]. Frontiers in Neuroscience, Volume 14 - 2020 .

https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2020.00290 

Dauwels, J. (2007). On variational message passing on factor graphs. Information Theory, 2007. ISIT 

2007. IEEE International Symposium on, 

Défossez, A., Caucheteux, C., Rapin, J., Kabeli, O., & King, J.-R. (2023). Decoding speech perception 

from non-invasive brain recordings. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(10), 1097-1107. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-023-00714-5 

Demirel, B., Chesters, J., Connally, E. L., Gough, P. M., Ward, D., Howell, P., & Watkins, K. E. (2024). 

No evidence of altered language laterality in people who stutter across different brain imaging 

studies of speech and language. Brain Communications, 6(5), fcae305. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcae305 

Diester, I., Bartos, M., Bödecker, J., Kortylewski, A., Leibold, C., Letzkus, J., Nour, M. M., Schönauer, 

M., Straw, A., Valada, A., Vlachos, A., & Brox, T. (2024). Internal world models in humans, 

animals, and AI. Neuron, 112 (14), 2265-2268. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2024.06.019 Donhauser, P. W., & Baillet, S. (2020). Two Distinct Neural Timescales for Predictive Speech 

Processing. Neuron, 105 (2), 385-393.e389. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.10.019 

Fadiga, L., & Craighero, L. (2006). Hand Actions and Speech Representation in Broca's Area. Cortex, 

42 (4), 486-490. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-9452(08)70383-6 

Feldman, A. G., & Levin, M. F. (2009). The Equilibrium-Point Hypothesis – Past, Present and Future. 

In D. Sternad (Ed.), Progress in Motor Control: A Multidisciplinary Perspective (pp. 699-726). 

Springer US. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-77064-2_38 

Feldman, A. G., & Orlovsky, G. N. (1972). The influence of different descending systems on the tonic 

stretch reflex in the cat. Experimental Neurology, 37 (3), 481-494. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-4886(72)90091-X 

Fenk-Oczlon, G., & Pilz, J. (2021). Linguistic Complexity: Relationships Between Phoneme Inventory 

Size, Syllable Complexity, Word and Clause Length, and Population Size [Brief Research 

Report]. Frontiers in Communication, Volume 6 - 2021 .

https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomm.2021.626032 

Fleming, S. M., & Daw, N. D. (2017). Self-evaluation of decision-making: A general Bayesian 

framework for metacognitive computation. Psychological Review, 124 (1), 91-114. 

https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000045 

Fleming, S. M., Weil, R. S., Nagy, Z., Dolan, R. J., & Rees, G. (2010). Relating Introspective Accuracy 

to Individual Differences in Brain Structure. Science, 329 (5998), 1541-1543. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1191883 

Forney, G. D. (2001). Codes on graphs: Normal realizations. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 

47 (2), 520-548. 

Fransella, F., & Beech, H. R. (1965). An experimental analysis of the effect of rhythm or the speech of 

stutterers. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 3 (3), 195-201. https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-

7967(65)90005-7 

Fridriksson, J., den Ouden, D.-B., Hillis, A. E., Hickok, G., Rorden, C., Basilakos, A., Yourganov, G., 

& Bonilha, L. (2018). Anatomy of aphasia revisited. Brain, 141 (3), 848-862. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awx363 

Friederici, A. D. (2002). Towards a neural basis of auditory sentence processing. Trends in cognitive 

sciences, 6 (2), 78-84. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01839-8 

Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2017a). Active Inference: A 

Process Theory. Neural Computation, 29 (1), 1-49. https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00912 

Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2015). Active inference 

and epistemic value. Cognitive neuroscience (6:4), 187-214. 

http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053 Friston, K. J., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2017b). The graphical brain: belief propagation and active 

inference. Network Neuroscience, 0 (ja), 1-78. https://doi.org/10.1162/NETN_a_00018 

Friston, K. J., Parr, T., Yufik, Y., Sajid, N., Price, C. J., & Holmes, E. (2020). Generative models, 

linguistic communication and active inference. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 118 ,

42-64. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.07.005 

Friston, K. J., Rosch, R., Parr, T., Price, C., & Bowman, H. (2017c). Deep temporal models and active 

inference. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 77 , 388-402. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.04.009 

George, D., & Hawkins, J. (2009). Towards a Mathematical Theory of Cortical Micro-circuits. PLoS 

computational biology, 5 (10), e1000532. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000532 

Gick, B., Wilson, I., Koch, K., & Cook, C. (2004). Language-Specific Articulatory Settings: Evidence 

from Inter-Utterance Rest Position. Phonetica, 61 (4), 220-233. 

https://doi.org/10.1159/000084159 

Giraud, A.-L., & Poeppel, D. (2012). Cortical oscillations and speech processing: emerging 

computational principles and operations. Nature neuroscience, 15 (4), 511-517. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3063 

Goldiamond, I. (1965). Stuttering and fluency as manipulatable operant response classes. In L. Krasner, 

A. Bandura, & L. P. Ullmann (Eds.), Research in Behavior Modification: New Developments 

and Implications . Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 

https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ckV9AAAAMAAJ 

Gregg, B. A., & Yairi, E. (2012). Disfluency patterns and phonological skills near stuttering onset. 

Journal of Communication Disorders, 45 (6), 426-438. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2012.08.001 

Grossman, M. (2012). The non-fluent/agrammatic variant of primary progressive aphasia. The Lancet 

Neurology, 11 (6), 545-555. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70099-6 

Grotjahn, R., & Altmann, G. (1993). Modelling the Distribution of Word Length: Some Methodological 

Problems. In R. Köhler & B. B. Rieger (Eds.), Contributions to Quantitative Linguistics: 

Proceedings of the First International Conference on Quantitative Linguistics, QUALICO, 

Trier, 1991 (pp. 141-153). Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-1769-2_9 

Guenther, F. H. (2016). Neural Control of Speech . The MIT Press. 

https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/10471.001.0001 

Hasson, U., Yang, E., Vallines, I., Heeger, D. J., & Rubin, N. (2008). A Hierarchy of Temporal 

Receptive Windows in Human Cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience, 28 (10), 2539. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5487-07.2008 Hébert, S., Racette, A., Gagnon, L., & Peretz, I. (2003). Revisiting the dissociation between singing 

and speaking in expressive aphasia. Brain, 126 (8), 1838-1850. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awg186 

Heilbron, M., Armeni, K., Schoffelen, J.-M., Hagoort, P., & de Lange, F. P. (2022). A hierarchy of 

linguistic predictions during natural language comprehension. Proceedings of the National 

Academy of Sciences, 119 (32), e2201968119. https://doi.org/doi:10.1073/pnas.2201968119 

Heldner, M., & Edlund, J. (2010). Pauses, gaps and overlaps in conversations. Journal of Phonetics, 

38 (4), 555-568. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2010.08.002 

Hickok, G. (2009a). Eight Problems for the Mirror Neuron Theory of Action Understanding in Monkeys 

and Humans. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21 (7), 1229-1243. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2009.21189 

Hickok, G. (2009b). The functional neuroanatomy of language. Physics of Life Reviews, 6 (3), 121-143. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2009.06.001 

Hickok, G., & Poeppel, D. (2004). Dorsal and ventral streams: a framework for understanding aspects 

of the functional anatomy of language. Cognition, 92 (1), 67-99. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2003.10.011 

Holmes, E., Parr, T., Griffiths, T. D., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Active inference, selective attention, and 

the cocktail party problem. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 131 , 1288-1304. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.09.038 

Howell, P., & El-Yaniv, N. (1987). The effects of presenting a click in syllable-initial position on the 

speech of stutterers: Comparison with a metronome click. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 12 (4), 

249-256. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0094-730X(87)90003-9 

Howell, P., James, A. Y., J., Y. S., & and Eldridge, K. (2006). Phonetic difficulty and stuttering in 

English. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 20 (9), 703-716. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/02699200500390990 

International Phonetic Association. (2020). International Phonetic Alphabet chart . International 

Phonetic Association. https://www.internationalphoneticalphabet.org/ipa-charts/ipa-symbols-

chart-complete/ 

Ito, T., Bai, J., & Ostry, D. J. (2020). Contribution of sensory memory to speech motor learning. Journal 

of Neurophysiology, 124 (4), 1103-1109. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00457.2020 

Jackson, E. S., Miller, L. R., Warner, H. J., & Yaruss, J. S. (2021). Adults who stutter do not stutter 

during private speech. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 70 , 105878. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2021.105878 Kaelbling, L. P., Littman, M. L., & Cassandra, A. R. (1998). Planning and acting in partially observable 

stochastic domains. Artificial Intelligence, 101 (1), 99-134. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0004-3702(98)00023-X 

Kalinowski, J., Stuart, A., Sark, S., & Armson, J. (1996). Stuttering amelioration at various auditory 

feedback delays and speech rates. International Journal of Language & Communication 

Disorders, 31 (3), 259-269. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.3109/13682829609033157 

Kaltenmaier, A., Davis, M. H., & Press, C. (2025). Fixed and flexible perceptual rhythms. Trends in 

cognitive sciences, 29 (10), 903-913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2025.05.011 

Kearney, E., & and Guenther, F. H. (2019). Articulating: the neural mechanisms of speech production. 

Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 34 (9), 1214-1229. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2019.1589541 

Khanna, A. R., Muñoz, W., Kim, Y. J., Kfir, Y., Paulk, A. C., Jamali, M., Cai, J., Mustroph, M. L., 

Caprara, I., Hardstone, R., Mejdell, M., Meszéna, D., Zuckerman, A., Schweitzer, J., Cash, S., 

& Williams, Z. M. (2024). Single-neuronal elements of speech production in humans. Nature, 

626 (7999), 603-610. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06982-w 

Kiebel, S. J., Daunizeau, J., & Friston, K. J. (2008). A Hierarchy of Time-Scales and the Brain. PLoS 

Comput Biol, 4 (11), e1000209. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000209 

Levinson, S. C. (2025). The Origin of the Interaction Engine and Its Role in Language Evolution. In S. 

C. Levinson (Ed.), The Interaction Engine: Language in Social Life and Human Evolution (pp. 

54-106). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/DOI : 10.1017/9781009570343.005 

Levinson, S. C., & Torreira, F. (2015). Timing in turn-taking and its implications for processing models 

of language [Original Research]. Frontiers in Psychology, Volume 6 - 2015 .

https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00731 

Liberman, A. M., & Mattingly, I. G. (1985). The motor theory of speech perception revised. Cognition, 

21 (1), 1-36. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(85)90021-6 

Liebenthal, E., Binder, J. R., Spitzer, S. M., Possing, E. T., & Medler, D. A. (2005). Neural Substrates 

of Phonemic Perception. Cerebral Cortex, 15 (10), 1621-1631. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhi040 

Lincoln, M., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2006). Altered auditory feedback and the treatment of 

stuttering: A review. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31 (2), 71-89. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2006.04.001 

Loeliger, H. A., Dauwels, J., Hu, J., Korl, S., Ping, L., & Kschischang, F. R. (2007). The Factor Graph 

Approach to Model-Based Signal Processing. Proceedings of the IEEE, 95 (6), 1295-1322. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2007.896497 Lotto, A. J., Hickok, G. S., & Holt, L. L. (2009). Reflections on mirror neurons and speech perception. 

Trends in cognitive sciences, 13 (3), 110-114. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2008.11.008 

MacLarnon, A. (2011). 224 The anatomical and physiological basis of human speech production: 

adaptations and exaptations. In The Oxford Handbook of Language Evolution (pp. 0). Oxford 

University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199541119.013.0022 

Marian, V., Bartolotti, J., Chabal, S., & Shook, A. (2012). CLEARPOND: Cross-Linguistic Easy-

Access Resource for Phonological and Orthographic Neighborhood Densities. PLoS One, 7 (8), 

e43230. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0043230 

Meister, I. G., Wilson, S. M., Deblieck, C., Wu, A. D., & Iacoboni, M. (2007). The Essential Role of 

Premotor Cortex in Speech Perception. Current Biology, 17 (19), 1692-1696. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2007.08.064 

Mesgarani, N., Cheung, C., Johnson, K., & Chang, E. F. (2014). Phonetic Feature Encoding in Human 

Superior Temporal Gyrus. Science, 343 (6174), 1006-1010. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1245994 

Meyer, A. S. (2023). Timing in conversation. Journal of Cognition, 6 (1), 20. 

Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Mathys, C. D., & Friston, K. J. (2016). Scene Construction, Visual 

Foraging, and Active Inference [Hypothesis & Theory]. Frontiers in Computational 

Neuroscience, 10 (56). https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2016.00056 

Mitsuya, T., & Munhall, K. G. (2019). The influence of bistable auditory feedback on speech motor 

control. Experimental Brain Research, 237 (12), 3155-3163. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-

019-05657-1 

Möttönen, R., & Watkins, K. E. (2009). Motor Representations of Articulators Contribute to Categorical 

Perception of Speech Sounds. The Journal of Neuroscience, 29 (31), 9819. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6018-08.2009 

Neef, N. E., & Chang, S.-E. (2024). Knowns and unknowns about the neurobiology of stuttering. PLOS 

Biology, 22 (2), e3002492. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002492 

Norton, A., Zipse, L., Marchina, S., & Schlaug, G. (2009). Melodic Intonation Therapy. Annals of the 

New York Academy of Sciences, 1169 (1), 431-436. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04859.x 

Nour, M. M., Dahoun, T., Schwartenbeck, P., Adams, R. A., FitzGerald, T. H. B., Coello, C., Wall, M. 

B., Dolan, R. J., & Howes, O. D. (2018). Dopaminergic basis for signaling belief updates, but 

not surprise, and the link to paranoia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 

115 (43), E10167-E10176. https://doi.org/doi:10.1073/pnas.1809298115 Ogar, J., Hilary, S., Nina, D., Serena, A., & and Luisa Gorno-Tempini, M. (2005). Apraxia of Speech: 

An overview. Neurocase, 11 (6), 427-432. https://doi.org/10.1080/13554790500263529 

Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2018). The Anatomy of Inference: Generative Models and Brain Structure 

[Review]. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 12 (90). 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2018.00090 

Parr, T., Markovic, D., Kiebel, S. J., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Neuronal message passing using Mean-

field, Bethe, and Marginal approximations. Scientific Reports, 9(1), 1889. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-38246-3 

Parr, T., Oswal, A., & Manohar, S. G. (2025). Inferring when to move. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral 

Reviews, 169 , 105984. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2024.105984 

Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., & Friston, K. J. (2022). Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind, 

Brain, and Behavior . MIT Press. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/12441.001.0001 

Peach, R. K., & Tonkovich, J. D. (2004). Phonemic characteristics of apraxia of speech resulting from 

subcortical hemorrhage. Journal of Communication Disorders, 37 (1), 77-90. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2003.08.001 

Perrier, P., Ostry David, J., & Laboissière, R. (1996). The Equilibrium Point Hypothesis and Its 

Application to Speech Motor Control. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 

39 (2), 365-378. https://doi.org/10.1044/jshr.3902.365 

Pezzulo, G., D'Amato, L., Mannella, F., Priorelli, M., Van de Maele, T., Stoianov, I. P., & Friston, K. 

(2024). Neural representation in active inference: Using generative models to interact with— 

and understand—the lived world. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1534 (1), 45-

68. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.15118 

Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Hierarchical Active Inference: A Theory of Motivated 

Control. Trends in cognitive sciences, 0 (0). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.01.009 

Poeppel, D. (2003). The analysis of speech in different temporal integration windows: cerebral 

lateralization as ‘asymmetric sampling in time’. Speech Communication, 41 (1), 245-255. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-6393(02)00107-3 

Popescu, T., Stahl, B., Wiernik, B. M., Haiduk, F., Zemanek, M., Helm, H., Matzinger, T., Beisteiner, 

R., & Fitch, W. T. (2022). Melodic Intonation Therapy for aphasia: A multi-level meta-analysis 

of randomized controlled trials and individual participant data. Annals of the New York 

Academy of Sciences, 1516 (1), 76-84. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.14848 

Price, C. J., Price, C. J., Wise, R. J. S., Warburton, E. A., Moore, C. J., Howard, D., Patterson, K., 

Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Friston, K. J. (1996). Hearing and saying: The functional neuro-

anatomy of auditory word processing. Brain, 119 (3), 919-931. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/119.3.919 Quarrington, B. (1965). Stuttering as a function of the information value and sentence position of words. 

Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 70 (3), 221-224. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0022143 

Riley Glyndon, D. (1972). A Stuttering Severity Instrument for Children and Adults. Journal of Speech 

and Hearing Disorders, 37 (3), 314-322. https://doi.org/10.1044/jshd.3703.314 

Rittershofer, K., Gehmacher, Q., & Press, C. (2025). Predictive coding for social perception: Complex 

interactions across space and time. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 169 , 105993. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2024.105993 

Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A Simplest Systematics for the Organization of 

Turn-Taking for Conversation. Language, 50 (4), 696-735. https://doi.org/10.2307/412243 

Sajid, N., Ball, P. J., Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2021a). Active Inference: Demystified and Compared. 

Neural Computation, 33 (3), 674-712. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01357 

Sajid, N., Tigas, P., Zakharov, A., Fountas, Z., & Friston, K. (2021b). Exploration and preference 

satisfaction trade-off in reward-free learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04316 .

Saltzman, E. L., & Munhall, K. G. (1989). A Dynamical Approach to Gestural Patterning in Speech 

Production. Ecological Psychology, 1(4), 333-382. 

https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326969eco0104_2 

Schöner, G. (1990). A dynamic theory of coordination of discrete movement. Biological cybernetics, 

63 (4), 257-270. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00203449 

Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T. H. B., Mathys, C., Dolan, R., & Friston, K. (2015). The 

Dopaminergic Midbrain Encodes the Expected Certainty about Desired Outcomes. Cerebral 

Cortex, 25 (10), 3434-3445. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu159 

Schwöbel, S., Kiebel, S., & Marković, D. (2018). Active Inference, Belief Propagation, and the Bethe 

Approximation. Neural Computation , 1-38. 

Shewan, C. M., & Kertesz, A. (1980). Reliability and Validity Characteristics of the Western Aphasia 

Battery (WAB). Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 45 (3), 308-324. 

https://doi.org/doi:10.1044/jshd.4503.308 

Skantze, G. (2021). Turn-taking in Conversational Systems and Human-Robot Interaction: A Review. 

Computer Speech & Language, 67 , 101178. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csl.2020.101178 

[Record #635 is using a reference type undefined in this output style.] Soderberg, G. A. (1971). Relations of word information and word length to stuttering disfluencies. 

Journal of Communication Disorders, 4 (1), 9-14. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-

9924(71)90057-8 

Strand, E. A., Duffy, J. R., Clark, H. M., & Josephs, K. (2014). The apraxia of speech rating scale: A 

tool for diagnosis and description of apraxia of speech. Journal of Communication Disorders, 

51 , 43-50. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2014.06.008 

Sun, L., & Manohar, S. G. (2023). Syntax through rapid synaptic changes. bioRxiv ,

2023.2012.2021.572018. https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.12.21.572018 

Tetnowski, J. A., Scott, K. S., & Rutland, B. F. (2021). Fluency and Fluency Disorders. In The 

Handbook of Language and Speech Disorders (pp. 414-444). 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119606987.ch19 

Theys, C., De Nil, L., Thijs, V., van Wieringen, A., & Sunaert, S. (2013). A crucial role for the cortico-

striato-cortical loop in the pathogenesis of stroke-related neurogenic stuttering. Human brain 

mapping, 34 (9), 2103-2112. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22052 

Theys, C., Jaakkola, E., Melzer, T. R., De Nil, L. F., Guenther, F. H., Cohen, A. L., Fox, M. D., & 

Joutsa, J. (2024). Localization of stuttering based on causal brain lesions. Brain, 147 (6), 2203-

2213. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awae059 

Toyomura, A., Fujii, T., & Kuriki, S. (2015). Effect of an 8-week practice of externally triggered speech 

on basal ganglia activity of stuttering and fluent speakers. NeuroImage, 109 , 458-468. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.01.024 

Usler, E. (2025). An active inference account of stuttering behavior [Hypothesis and Theory]. Frontiers 

in Human Neuroscience, Volume 19 - 2025 . https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2025.1498423 

Vissani, M., Bush, A., Lipski, W. J., Bullock, L., Fischer, P., Neudorfer, C., Holt, L. L., Fiez, J. A., 

Turner, R. S., & Richardson, R. M. (2025). Spike-phase coupling of subthalamic neurons to 

posterior perisylvian cortex predicts speech sound accuracy. Nature Communications, 16 (1), 

3357. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-58781-8 

Watkins, K. E., Strafella, A. P., & Paus, T. (2003). Seeing and hearing speech excites the motor system 

involved in speech production. Neuropsychologia, 41 (8), 989-994. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0028-3932(02)00316-0 

Wikipedia contributors. (2026). English phonology . Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 

16/02/2026 from 

https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=English_phonology&oldid=1335940802 

Yedidia, J. S., Freeman, W. T., & Weiss, Y. (2005). Constructing free-energy approximations and 

generalized belief propagation algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 51 (7), 

2282-2312. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2005.850085 Young, S., Gašić, M., Thomson, B., & Williams, J. D. (2013). POMDP-Based Statistical Spoken Dialog 

Systems: A Review. Proceedings of the IEEE, 101 (5), 1160-1179. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2012.2225812 

Zarate, J. M., & Zatorre, R. J. (2008). Experience-dependent neural substrates involved in vocal pitch 

regulation during singing. NeuroImage, 40 (4), 1871-1887. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.01.026