Title: The neural signature of simple overlearned temporal expectations
resembles episodic retrieval

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
The neural signature of simple overlearned temporal expectations 

resembles episodic retrieval 

Linda Sempf 1, Peter Vavra 1, Toemme Noesselt 1,2  

> 1

Department of Biopsychology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Otto -von-Guericke-Universität, Magdeburg  

> 2

Centre of Behavio ral Brain Sciences, Otto -von-Guericke-Universität, Magdeburg 

Correspondence to: 

Linda Sempf 

Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Institute of Psychology Universitätsplatz 2 39106 Magdeburg Germany linda.sempf@ovgu.de 

Keywords: expectation, temporal, fMRI, training, learning saturation 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Abstract 

Temporal expectations are crucial for adaptive responding to predictable events. Most 

previous imaging studies have focused on the neural underpinnings of unexpectedness 

rather than expectedness, without considering that neural responses related to 

temporal expectations may be confounded by parallel learning processes. To identify 

the neural basis of overlearned expectancy with fMRI, we employed a multi -day detection paradigm with auditory cues preceding visual targets at likely and unlikely time points. After training left inferior parietal cortex was engaged in processing overlearned temporal expectations together with retrosplenial and prefrontal cortex. Remarkably, compared with untrained controls, we observed inverted brain responses as a function of stimulus likelihood and training status. Finally, the brain regions coding overlearned expectancy had previously been implicated in episodic retrieval and simulation (based on Neurosynth association tests), suggesting that frequently used temporal expectations may, over time, utilize episodic memory routines to simulate likely future events and thus guide behavior. 

Introduction 

Our environment is rich in statistical regularities that convey meaningful information 

especially within stable environments. For instance, we learn that the brief whir of an 

automatic door motor signals that the doors to the cafeteria will open a certain moment 

later, and we routinely use this information to adjust our walking speed without risking a 

collision or wasting time waiting in front of a still -closed door. The cognitive system is well adapted to detect temporal regularities, as this capacity allows us to foresee possible consequences and prepare those that appear most likely 1. This skill might be particularly useful in reoccurring environments, such as those encountered in the course of our often stubborn daily work routines. A large body of empirical research suggests that we continuously rely on temporal expectations to optimize motor responses (for a comprehensive review, see 2). For instance, in simple detection paradigms temporal predictability reliably facilitates response speed, resulting in faster reactions to expected stimuli: the so-called temporal expectation effect. These temporal expectations are thought to be the product of learning of temporal regularities of the environment. The cognitive system continuously extracts temporal structures from incoming sensory information, which can then be used to form new expectations. In probabilistic environments this extraction process is commonly described by statistical learning, i.e. an innate, automatic function of the cognitive system 3,4 and has been related to specific processes including updating and surprise. Several hypotheses have been proposed regarding the neural basis of this learning phenomenon. In a recent review, 5 noted that statistical learning ‘includes practically the entire brain’, reflecting the fact that domain-general processes, domain-specific processes, and their interaction have all been proposed as explanatory accounts. Such domain-general computational principles may be supported by partially shared neural systems, including the hippocampus, whereas domain-specific representations formed through statistical learning remain constrained by the sensory and motor systems processing the relevant information 6.

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Another line of research focuses on the effects of utilizing temporal expectations which 

are often induced through statistical regularities embedded in the experimental design. 

Within these implicit temporal expectation paradigms , involved brain regions include 

prefrontal regions plus left fronto -cingulate cortex 9, motor regions including SMA, premotor cortex, and cerebellum 14 , temporal regions including posterior middle temporal gyrus 15 , superior temporal gyrus 12 , planum temporale 16 and even primary 

auditory cortex 7, and occipital cortex including even primary visual cortex 16 . Most 

prominently, the left inferior parietal cortex , and left intraparietal sulcus have been 

repeatedly associated with the active application of temporal expectations and even 

more fundamental time –space integration processes 20 - though these activations often emerge in task-related contrasts (e.g., temporal attention versus no temporal attention or exogenous versus endogenous timing tasks), and the exact location within parietal cortex and sometimes even the lateralization vary between studies. Taken together, previous research points to a wide range of neural regions implicated in the application of temporal expectations, partially overlapping with regions associated with statistical learning. Yet, the differentiation between processes related to the dynamical formation versus the active use of already formed expectations has so far been neglected, as most studies investigating the application of temporal expectations typically assess these expectations in the same session in which the underlying regularities are acquired, and therefore after only limited exposure to these temporal regularities, such that their formation and use are likely to occur concurrently. On a theoretical level, Bayesian accounts of learning 21–23 and related predictive coding 

frameworks 24–27 all posit that learning is strongest during the initial stages of exposure 

and decreases over time. Likewise, as the environmental structure becomes familiar 

and predictions become more reliable, learning gradually saturates and updates to the 

internal model become smaller. First evidence for this proposed interaction of 

acquisition and application in temporal expectation was reported by 8, though note that 

this study examined the dynamics only within a single session, whereas in real -world settings temporal expectations are often repeatedly retrieved and applied over much longer time scales and may be further consolidated during sleep. Hence, repeated exposure over days should minimize the effects of learning on brain responses. 

The current experiment 

Here, we aimed at identifying neural regions instrumental in the application of temporal 

expectation in stable environments. By the repeated exposure prior to our main 

experiment, we aimed to minimize learning and updating. To mirror real -life as closely as possible, passive observations and active task engagement were both introduced in the experimental design: an initial passive viewing phase resembling statistical learning through observation 28,29 , followed by a two -day training program requiring participants to actively use the temporal regularities to optimize their performance. Only after these three exposure phases, on the fourth day of the study, did we examine the neural underpinnings of the application of overlearned temporal expectation (see Fig. 1a). In particular, we designed a study in which participants were confronted with cross-modal stimulus sequences, enabling the formation of distinct temporal expectations (see Fig. 1b). The task design consisted of an auditory cue followed by a visual target 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

appearing either after 500 or 1500 ms. Within blocks of stimulus sequences, targets 

were either likely or unlikely to occur at an early or late time point (74%/26% likelihood 

ratio of the two cue -target intervals). Thus, there were two distinct temporal environments: one in which the target appeared early on most trials ( early likely block ), and one in which the target appeared late on most trials ( late likely block ) – see Fig. 1b. 

Fig. 1 A Experimental procedure. In the main experiment participants completed five sessions across four 

consecutive days: a passive naïve session in the scanner (session 1, day 1), two active training sessions outside the 

scanner (session 2 –3, days 2-3), a passive trained session in the scanner (session 4, day 4), and an active trained session in the scanner (session 5, day 4. In a control experiment, participants only completed one active session inside or outside the scanner (identical to session 5 or 2 but without prior training or passive exposure). B

Experimental design with two different temporal environments. In environment A (early target likely), the visual target occurred 500 ms after the auditory cue on 74% of trials and after 1500 ms on 26%. In environment B (late target likely), the probabilities were reversed, with the target appearing after 1500 ms on 74% and after 500 ms on 26% of trials. 

Behavioral and fMRI read-outs were recorded and we examined how temporal expectation effects – that is, improved performance in response to temporally likely vs unlikely stimuli – are reflected in overt motor behavior and brain signals. These overlearned read-outs were compared to those acquired without training. In particular, we hypothesized that early likely trials should rely on the application of temporal expectation, whereas early unlikely trials should rely on a violation of temporal expectation, often termed ’surprise’. The late likely trials should again rely on cognitive process of expectation application. However, late unlikely trials would not only rely on surprise but a readjustment of the temporal focus of attention to another point in time in contrast to unlikely early trials. Hence, the comparison of early likely vs unlikely trials should reveal the effects of temporal expectation less contaminated by additional cognitive processes. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Results 

Temporal regularities shape response times 

We first compared early likely to early unlikely trials behaviorally. On average, 

participants responded significantly faster to early likely compared to early unlikely 

trials (t(34) = -6.66; p < .001; see Fig. 2a and table 1). This suggests that participants were able to build temporal expectations based on temporal regularities - a notion consistent with the idea that anticipating events in time facilitates responses (e.g., 30 ). 

No consistent correlate of expectancy has been proposed for late likely vs. unlikely 

trials (though see 31,32 ), and it has further been argued that expectancy is diminished for 

late trials 33 . Here, we observed even negative response times in numerous late trials 

(see Fig. 2b), resulting in a “negative” temporal expectation effect, with shorter 

response times to late unlikely than to late likely targets. This may indicate that 

participants also formed temporal expectations for late trials. However, the pattern 

observed for late trials may partly reflect anticipatory responses triggered by 

expectations at the early time point. In late unlikely trials premature responses may 

reflect a strong anticipation of target occurrence at the early time point due to the 

predominance of early targets within that environment. Enhanced response 

preparation, combined with failed response inhibition, may therefore have resulted in a 

higher number of premature responses here. In late likely trials premature responses 

may reflect increased uncertainty due to the longest cue -target interval (see e.g. 34,35 )

resulting in an increase in premature responses with increasing cue -target intervals 31 .

Next, we examined the statistical robustness and time course of these temporal expectation effects for early trials. The effect of temporal expectation remained significant (main effect likeliness: F(1,34) = 38.31, p <.001) and did not vary across runs (interaction run x likeliness: F(2.19, 74.44) = 1.41, p = .249), see Fig. 2a. For late trials we again observed a main effect of likeliness (F(1,34) = 9.43, p <.005) and no significant interaction with run F(2.30, 78.25) = 1.64, p = .197). In sum, participants showed a robust temporal expectation effect, though inverted for late trials.                          

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig. 2. Group average response times (RT) for early likely targets are displayed in dark purple and for early unlikely targets in dark
> green, whereas response times for late likely targets are shown in light purple and for late unlikely targets in light green. (A) Mean RTs
> (± SE). Participants responded faster to early likely than to early unlikely targets. In contrast, participants responded faster to late
> unlikely than to late likely targets, reflecting premature responses resulting in very short and, in some cases, even negative RTs. Note
> that this inverse pattern remains even if premature responses (i.e. < 200 ms post -target) were excluded from analysis (p<.057). Also note that the use of median RTs for statistics resulted in qualitatively similar outcomes. Statistical significance is denoted by *** for early trials and ** for late trials. (B) Density distribution of mean RTs across participants for all four conditions. Density distributions illustrate lower RTs for early likely compared to early unlikely targets and the presence of very short and, in some cases, even negative RTs in late trials. 0 denotes target onset. Y-axis represents estimated probability density in arbitrary units.

In the two combined control experiments, we again found that naïve (i.e., untrained) 

participants responded significantly faster to early likely than to early unlikely targets 

(main effect likeliness: F(1,50) = 139.90, p < .001) and temporal expectation effects did 

not vary across runs (interaction run x likeliness: F(2.67, 133.71) = 0.09, p = .954). Also 

consistent with the main experiment, late trials showed a main effect of likeliness (F(1, 

50) = 17.39, p < .001), with faster response times for late unlikely than for late likely 

trials. This effect did not interact with run (F(1.82, 90.77) = 0.87, p = .413). 

Finally, we directly tested whether the repeated exposure to the stimuli modulated behavioral read-outs of temporal expectation relative to a single-session version of the task. To this end, response times for early trials of trained and naïve participants were compared using a linear mixed-effects model. As previously observed, temporal expectation effects were significant (main effect likeliness: F(1, 17010.07) = 162.78, p < .001). There was neither a main effect of training status (F(1, 83.66) = 0.00, p = .993), nor a main effect of experimental setting (inside/outside MRI-scanner; F(1, 82.98) = 0.42, p = .519), indicating comparable overall response times that were unaffected by general training effects or by the MRI environment. Importantly, the interaction between likeliness and training status was significant (F(1, 17010.07) = 11.17, p = .001), with a significantly larger TE effect in naïve than in trained participants (Δ = 12.6 ms, z = -3.34, p < .001). No such differential interaction effect was observed for late trials (p = .534). This indicated that repeated exposure and training indeed altered the behavioral expression of temporal expectations selectively for early trials. 

Neural correlates of overlearned temporal expectation resemble those of 

episodic cognition 

Following this, we aimed to identify the brain regions instrumental in the application of 

overlearned temporal expectation. First, we characterized the neural basis of the 

temporal expectation effect for early trials resembling the behavioral effect and thus 

facilitating comparability with previous studies investigating temporal expectations (e.g. 

> 36

). Comparing early likely > early unlikely trials, two significant regions emerged: one in 

the left inferior parietal lobule (IPL) and one in the left rostrolateral prefrontal cortex 

(RLPFC) (see Fig. 3a, yellow areas and table 2). Moreover, statistical regularities might 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

still have been extracted in both early and late temporal environments , while surprise 

and attentional reallocation might have overshadowed behavioral readouts of temporal 

expectation in the late conditions . To test this hypothesis of a general expectancy effect 

on the neural level, we therefore compared likely > unlikely trials across temporal 

environments. We observed significant modulations of fMRI signals spanning the left 

IPL, the anterior retrosplenial cortex (RSC), right anterior medial prefrontal cortex 

(aMPFC), and bilateral ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) (see Fig. 3a, green areas 

and table 2). For completeness, we also tested for additional regions significantly 

modulated by late likely > unlikely trials ; however, no clusters survived correction for 

multiple comparisons. Bar plots of the region -wise average beta weights revealed a difference for both early and late trials (though note that the difference of late trials were slightly smaller than of the early trials, see Fig. 3b). Together, these results indicate that a network of brain regions is instrumental in successfully applying overlearned temporal expectations and may account, at least in part, for the observed behavioral temporal expectation effect. 

Fig. 3. (A) Neural correlates of overlearned temporal expectation. Whole -brain group results for the main effect of temporal likeliness ( likely > unlikely ) are displayed in green, the effect of temporal expectation in early trials ( early likely > early unlikely ) is displayed in yellow. For early trials, significant clusters were observed in the left inferior parietal lobule (left IPL, BA 39) and the left rostrolateral prefrontal cortex (left RLPFC BA 10). For the main effect (likely > unlikely), significant clusters were observed in the left inferior parietal lobule (left IPL, BA 39), retrosplenial cortex (RSC, BA 29/30), right anterior medial prefrontal cortex (right aMPFC, BA 10), and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC, BA 11). Statistical maps are displayed on a standard Montreal Neurological Institute template (MNI152) and thresholded at p < .05 (FWE-corrected at the cluster level; auxiliary threshold of p < .001 at the voxel level). Color-coded regions indicate enhanced fMRI-signals for likely compared to unlikely trials. Coordinates are reported in MNI space. X-, Y-, and Z-values indicate slice location in MNI space. Neurological convention is used. (B) Region-wise mean beta weights (proportional to % signal change) for each cluster. 

Linking neural activation patterns to cognitive terminology 

To further characterize the functional profile of the regions identified in the likely > 

unlikely contrast, we queried the peak voxel of each significant cluster using the term -based association maps provided by Neurosynth 37 . The peak voxels of the left IPL and 

the RSC showed strong associations with the term episodic (left IPL: z = 7.56, posterior 

probability = .75; RSC: z = 4.68, posterior probability = .75) and autobiographical (left 

IPL: z = 9.2, posterior probability = .84; RSC: z = 5.25, posterior probability = .83). The 

peak voxel of the left IPL showed furthermore strong associations with the term retrieval 

(z = 7.96, posterior probability = .72). The peak voxel of the aMPFC was strongly          

> z = -16 z = 6 z = 25 z = 40
> y = -69 y = -49 y = 40 y = 57
> x = -46 x = -14 x = -4 x = 8
> RSC

A    

> left IPL left RLPFC right aMPFC vmPFC
> -20 -10 010 -20 -10 010 -20 -10 010
> Contrast estimates and 90% C.I. early likely early unlikely late likely late unlikely

B

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint associated with the terms default (z = 6.81, posterior probability = .74 ),

autobiographical memory (z = 5.18, posterior probability = .84) and referential (z = 4.3, 

posterior probability = .77), whereas the peak voxel of the vmPFC was strongly 

associated with the terms mentalizing (z = 7.65, posterior probability = .84) and theory 

of mind (z = 5.64, posterior probability = .80). 

To complement this voxel-wise characterization, we additionally decoded the entire unthresholded second-level statistical map using the Neurosynth Decoder. Among the highest-ranking terms associated with the resulting activation pattern were default mode (r = 0.267), autobiographical (r = .29), episodic (r = .225), retrieval (r = .195), memories (r = .18), referential (r = .167), self-referential (r = .166), theory of mind (r = .159), recollection (r = .151), mentalizing (r = .146), remembering (r = .144), and construction (r = .125); terms that conceptually converge on the broader construct of episodic cognition 38,39 or “Mental Time Travel” 40 .

Response acceleration 

To directly test for the correspondance of behavioral and neural measures, and to 

dissociate temporal expectation signals from simple response time variations, we also 

identified brain regions in which neural signals covaried with subjects’ response times 

across conditions. fMRI signals in four clusters showed a negative covariation with 

response times: first, a cluster spreading from left primary motor cortex to left primary 

somatosensory cortex, a second cluster within right secondary somatosensory cortex, 

a third cluster within the pars opercularis region of the right inferior frontal gyrus, and 

finally, a cluster encompassing the SMA and pre -SMA (see Fig. 4, blue areas and Table 2). This indicates that response acceleration was mainly associated with activity in motor-related regions and not the regions related to overlearned temporal expectation reported above. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 4. Neural covariations with response time. Whole -brain group results for negative covariation of fMRI-signals with response times (response acceleration) are displayed in blue, results for positive covariation of fMRI-signals with response time (sustained expectation) are displayed in copper. For response acceleration significant clusters were observed in left primary motor cortex (left M1, BA 4), left primary sensory cortex (left S1, BA 1/2/3), right secondary sensory cortex (right S2, BA 40), bilateral SMA and pre-SMA (BA 6) and right inferior frontal gyrus, pars opercularis (right IFG, BA 44). For sustained expectation significant clusters were observed in left inferior parietal lobule (left IPL, BA 39), bilateral precuneus (BA 7) and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC, BA 11). Statistical maps are displayed on a standard MNI template (MNI152) and thresholded at p < .05 (FWE-corrected at the cluster level; auxiliary threshold of p < .001 at the voxel level). Color-coded regions indicate enhanced fMRI-signals covarying with slower or faster response times. Coordinates are reported in MNI space. Y- and Z-values indicate slice location in MNI space. Neurological convention is used. 

Sustained expectation 

In addition, we identified regions whose fMRI -signals increased with longer response times using the inverse comparison (positive correlations of fMRI-signals with response time across conditions). Here, three significant clusters were found, including the bilateral precuneus, bilateral vmPFC, and once more the left IPL (see Fig. 4, copper areas and Table 2). Figure 5 depicts the three partially overlapping left IPL clusters identified across the comparisons early likely > early unlikely , likely > unlikely , and the covariation of fMRI-signals with response times. In the context of a robust temporal expectation effect across participants, positive correlations with individual response time should, however, be interpreted carefully. Due to the occurrence of very short and even negative response times, larger mean response times do not necessarily reflect weaker temporal expectations, but may rather reflect a reduced tendency to respond prematurely before target onset. Accordingly, fMRI-signals positively associated with response times may index neural processes related to the maintenance of temporal expectation until the actual target presentation, rather than the formation of temporal expectations per se. In accord, some researchers described the IPL as an episodic buffer 41 .

y = -28 y = -11 y = -3 y = 11 

M1 SMA IFG 

z = 6 z = 28 z = 36 z = 41 

S1 S2 

z = -9 

vmPFC 

> Precuneus

IPL 

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig. 5. Spatial overlap and dissociation of activation patterns within the left inferior parietal lobule (IPL) across comparisons. Green    

> indicates the main effect of temporal expectancy ( likely > unlikely ), yellow areas indicates the effect of temporal expectancy
> selectively in early trials ( early likely > early unlikely ), and brown indicates positive covariations of fMRI -signals with slower condition-specific response times. The visualization highlights that all three effects were localized within the left IPL while forming spatially distinct and only partially overlapping clusters. Statistical maps are displayed on a standard MNI template (MNI152) and thresholded at p < .05 (FWE-corrected at the cluster level; auxiliary threshold of p < .001 at the voxel level). Coordinates are reported in MNI space. X-, Y-, and Z-values indicate slice location in MNI space. Neurological convention is used.

Effect of Temporal Unexpectedness 

As a manipulation check we reversed the direction of the main effect of likeliness and 

examined regions showing enhanced fMRI signals for unlikely relative to likely targets. 

As expected, the GLM revealed significant effects in seven clusters potentially related to 

temporal reallocation and surprise: (1) the right temporoparietal junction, (2) bilateral 

primary, secondary and visual association cortex, (3) an additional cluster within the 

right visual association cortex, (4) the left primary motor cortex, (5) a cluster 

encompassing the right premotor cortex, the right anterior insula, the pars opercularis 

regions of the right inferior frontal gyrus, (6) bilateral SMA and pre -SMA, and (7) the left anterior insula (see Fig. 6 red areas and table 2). Remarkably, the identified clusters closely match the combination of multimodal and unimodal visual networks for involuntary attention to changes in the sensory environment described by 42 and, more 

recently, in attentional reorienting following violations of cross -modal expectancies 43 .

Restricting the analysis to early trials, the comparison early unlikely > early likely 

masked excl. by late unlikely > late likely at p = .05 revealed a single significant cluster in 

the left premotor cortex. In contrast, the corresponding comparison for late trials ( late 

unlikely > late likely masked excl. by early unlikely > early likely at p = .05) yielded 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

significant clusters in the right inferior frontal gyrus and the right TPJ (also see Fig. 6 

yellow (early) and blue (late) areas, and table 2) pointing at an involvement of these 

regions in attentional reallocation and surprise as hypothesized above. 

Fig. 6. Neural basis of temporal unexpectedness. Whole -brain group results for the main effect of unlikely > likely are shown in red. ). Results specific to early trials ( early unlikely > early likely , exclusively masked by late unlikely > late likely at p = .05) are shown in yellow, whereas results specific to late trials ( late unlikely > late likely , exclusively masked by early unlikely > early likely at p = .05) are shown in blue. For the main effect, significant clusters were observed in the right temporoparietal junction (TPJ), visual cortex (V1/V2) and visual association cortex (VAC), primary motor cortex (M1), supplementary motor cortex (SMA/pre-SMA), and right inferior frontal cortex (IFG, see also Table 2). The early-trial surprise effect was confined to the left premotor cortex, whereas the late-trial effect involved the right inferior frontal gyrus and right TPJ. Statistical maps are displayed on a standard MNI template (MNI152) and thresholded at p < .05 (FWE-corrected at the cluster level; auxiliary threshold of p < .001 at the voxel level). Color-coded regions indicate enhanced fMRI-response for unlikely trials. Coordinates are reported in MNI space. X-, Y-, and Z-values indicate slice location in MNI space. Neurological convention is used. 

z = -8 z = 1 z = 6 z = 10 

z = 22 z = 57 z = 61 z = 65 

TPJ V1/V2/VAC M1 PMC IFG SMA Ins 

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint Naive control group 

Finally, we directly tested for differential effects of training on the neural signature of the 

temporal expectation effect. We extracted condition -wise beta weights in the trained group (main experiment) and statistically compared the effects with the naive group per region. We found a significant interaction of likeliness and training status in RSC (F(1,49) = 11.20, p = .002) and right aMPFC (F(1,49) = 6.83, p = .012). Post hoc comparisons showed significant expectancy modulations in trained participants (RSC: p < .001; right aMPFC: p < .001), but not in untrained participants (RSC: p = .634; aMPFC: p = .785; Fig. 7A). No corresponding significant interaction was observed in left RLPFC, neither for the interaction of likeliness and training status (p = .08) nor for the interaction of likeliness, time interval and training status (p = .088), though a trend was there. In left IPL and vmPFC, a significant three-way interaction between likeliness, time interval, and training status was observed (left IPL 1 (region with maximal response to early effect): F(1, 49) = 4.53, p = .038; left IPL 2 (region with maximal response to main effect of likeliness): F(1, 49) = 4.36, p = .042; vmPFC: F(1, 49) = 4.98, p = .030). Follow-up analyses restricted to early trials confirmed that the effect of likeliness differed as a function of training status (left IPL 1: F(1, 49) = 7.49, p = .009; left IPL 2: F(1, 49) = 7.60, p = .008; vmPFC: F(1, 49) = 8.49, p = .005). Pairwise comparisons revealed a significant temporal expectation effect for early trials in trained participants in left IPL (left IPL 1: t(49) = 2.846, p = .006; left IPL 2: t(49) = 2.452, p = .018), whereas no expectancy-modulation was observed in untrained participants (left IPL 1: t(49) = -1.379, p = .174; left IPL 2: t(49) = -1.671, p = .101). In vmPFC, no significant expectancy effect was observed in trained participants for early trials (t(49) = 1.14, p = .259), whereas untrained participants showed a significant reversed expectancy effect favoring early 

unlikely over early likely targets (t(49) = -2.75, p = .008). This pattern of results strongly suggests that training has a profound effect on neural representations of temporal expectancy. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 7. Effects of training on beta weights (proportional to % signal change) within brain region identified in the main experiment . (A) 

Regions showing a significant likeliness × training status interaction. In both RSC and right aMPFC, expectancy -related activity differed between naïve and trained participants. Green panels depict effects based on the overall main effect of likeliness (likely > unlikely), collapsed across cue-target intervals. (B) Regions showing a significant likeliness × time interval × training status interaction. Follow-up analyses indicated that these effects were primarily driven by the early cue-target interval, with training modulating expectancy-related responses. Yellow panels depict contrasts restricted to early likely > early unlikely trials. Bars represent mean beta estimates ± SE. 

Discussion 

In this study, we aimed at identifying the neural underpinnings of the use of overlearned 

temporal expectations in humans. To this end, we created two distinct temporal 

environments which differed only in the probability distributions of cue –target time intervals, i.e. whether targets appeared more likely early or late after the cue. Participants were repeatedly exposed to and trained of these environments over several days to minimize the effects of concurrent learning. Behaviorally, we found a small but robust temporal expectation effect for early intervals, which was more pronounced in naïve than in trained participants. Neurally, the expectancy effect for early intervals in trained participants was associated with significant modulations in left IPL and left RLPFC. Remarkably, when early and late likely intervals were combined, significantly enhanced fMRI-signals emerged in the left IPL, bilateral RSC, right aMPFC, and bilateral vmPFC, despite the inversion of the temporal expectation effect for late trials on the behavioral level. This neural pattern was significantly different from untrained participants especially for early time intervals in five out of six brain regions - showing                            

> naïve trained naïve trained naïve trained naïve trained naïve trained
> likely > unlikely RSC likely > unlikely right aMPFC early likely > early unlikely left IPL likely > unlikely left IPL likely > unlikely vmPFC
> early likely early unlikely late likely late unlikely early likely early unlikely late likely late unlikely early likely early unlikely late likely late unlikely early likely early unlikely late likely late unlikely early likely early unlikely late likely late unlikely early likely early unlikely late likely late unlikely likely unlikely likely unlikely likely unlikely likely unlikely -20 020 40 -20 020 40 -20 020 40
> Mean beta (±SE)
> likely unlikely early likely early unlikely late likely late unlikely
> e unlikely e unlikely early likely early unlikely late likely late unlikely early likely early unlikely late likely late unlikely likely unlikely likely unlikely -20 020 40 -20 020 40 -20 020 40
> Mean beta (±SE)
> likely unlikely early likely early unlikely late likely late unlikely

*** *** *** 

## AB

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint expectancy effects in the trained group (for brain regions identified after extensive 

training) . Below, we start with a discussion of the behavioral effects before turning to 

traditional discussion of their neural basis and end with a discussion based on brain -cognitive-term-association: 

Extensively trained temporal expectations still optimize behavior 

Even with repeated exposure to the same temporal structure within a stable 

environment, trained participants continued to respond faster to early targets presented 

at likely vs. unlikely time points. The size of this temporal expectation effect was stable 

across runs yet smaller than a control group without prior training. The size of previously 

reported behavioral temporal expectation effects in single -session paradigms with comparable tasks consistently exceed the effect observed in the trained group, yet temporal expectation effects showed considerable variability across studies, ranging from over 16 ms 14,17 , to around and over 20 ms 19,44,45 , and up to more than 30 ms 46 .

However, given differences in specific task designs across studies, such cross -study comparisons can only remain descriptive. Yet, the difference between trained and naive groups were also observed with the current paradigm. They may suggest that training shifted the participants’ focus from immediate history effects (see e.g. 31 ) for trial history 

effects in foreperiod paradigms) towards the use of accumulated evidence 47 . Notably, 

even after extensive exposure to a stable temporal structure, temporal expectations 

continued to facilitate performance, indicating that well -established expectations are actively maintained and utilized to optimize behavior, consistent with the notion of everyday reliance on long-established temporal regularities. In contrast, unlikely late trials - i.e. trials in which a stimulus does not occur after an expected delay but later – have often not been analyzed in the context of temporal research 11,48,49 ; as it had been argued that these trials would contain additional cognitive 

processes including shifting the focus of temporal attention and reengaging to a new 

point in time. Moreover, some theories of attention have posited that attention only 

operates if there is uncertainty 50 , a condition not met by the likely late trials. Hence, 

effects of temporal expectation should not be observed for the late trials if expectation 

works by simply shifting the focus of temporal attention. 

On the behavioral level, we observed responses prior to stimulus onset that varied as a function of target likelihood, consistent with the notion that temporal expectations had been formed. However, such premature responses occurred more frequently in late 

unlikely trials, resulting in shorter response times for unlikely than for likely late targets. This pattern potentially points to a failure to fully withhold responses prepared for the expected early target, thereby obscuring the corresponding response-time benefit. Moreover, it could also be argued that additional processes might have overshadowed the underlying temporal expectation effect. For instance, an expected but omitted early interval stimulus may have served as an additional cue in case of late unlikely trials, thereby shifting response times closer to an internally generated cue. Nevertheless, the neural signature of expectancy might even be observable for late intervals despite additional internal processes and the inverted reaction times. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Applying overlearned temporal expectation resembles the neural pattern of 

retrieving episodic future simulations 

To capture the neural underpinnings of overlearned temporal expectation, we initially 

focused on early trials only, thereby mirroring the behavioral temporal expectation 

effect and at the same time minimizing the contribution of potential additional cognitive 

processes that may have been be even more engaged during late trials. The comparison 

of early likely > early unlikely trials revealed enhanced fMRI -signals in the left IPL and left RLPFC . This finding extends previous accounts of the left IPL by suggesting that its role is not limited to the formation and implementation of newly acquired temporal expectations via temporal orienting 13,16,17,19,51 , but also encompasses the application of 

repeatedly used temporal expectations in stable environments. However, in contrast to 

the aforementioned studies, the observed effect in the present study appears to be 

located slightly more posteriorly, within BA 39 rather than BA 40. Nevertheless, such 

neuroanatomical differences should be interpreted with caution and may, at least in 

part, reflect variations in preprocessing and normalization procedures across studies. 

Unlike the left IPL , the involvement of the left RLPFC has not previously been reported in 

the context of temporal expectation and might therefore represent a neural signature 

that is more associated with overlearned rather than newly acquired temporal 

expectations. Modulations within RLPFC have been linked to the monitoring and 

evaluation of internally generated information 52,53 and to stimulus -independent thought 54 , which becomes increasingly prominent when processing demands imposed 

by the external environment are low, such as in stable and predictable environments. 

Finally, it should be noted that previous MR -studies of temporal expectancy and attention often tested for an effect of task engagement by contrasting temporal vs. non-temporal attention (e.g., 11 ) or exogenous vs. endogenous orienting 55 , rather than 

investigating the effects within and across temporal environments as done here. 

To assess whether temporal expectation effects generalize beyond early trials, we subsequently included late trials in the analysis. This analysis was based on the assumption that the general effect of expectancy might have been overshadowed by other processes especially for late trials on the behavioral level (see above) yet still be observable at the neural level. Indeed, we again observed a modulation in the left IPL, plus the anterior RSC, the right aMPFC, and the bilateral vmPFC for the main effect of expectancy, with the latter three regions again not previously reported in temporal expectation research. As indexed by Neurosynth decoding results, these expectancy-modulated regions partly resemble the default mode network, which has been implicated in different higher-order cognitive processes such as self-referential cognition, mental exploration, internally generated cognition, and episodic memory processing 56,57 . The neural correlates of overlearned temporal expectation observed in the present study span two of the three proposed subsystems of the default mode network: a region of the central core (aMPFC) and regions of the MTL subsystem (IPL, RSC, vmPFC). These subsystems have distinct functions and contributions to behavioral regulation; however, during 

future-oriented cognition , these otherwise dissociable components are engaged simultaneously 58 .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Converging findings from the literature on future-oriented cognition 59 –63 have led to the proposal of a “ core network ” of the prospective brain 64 . Overlapping with the two subsystems of the default mode network previously mentioned, this network is thought to support episodic memory and episodic future simulation by temporarily decoupling from ongoing sensory input, thereby enabling the construction of internally generated representations of possible future events 65 . Accordingly, the same neural network is engaged during both episodic memory retrieval and future simulation, as both processes rely on the constructive recombination of informational content provided by episodic memory (for reviews and meta-analyses, see 66,67 . Strikingly, all expectancy-enhanced regions identified in our study fall within this “core network”, with the left IPL being causally implicated in episodic simulation by using TMS 68 , and the RSC, aMPFC and vmPFC constituting established elements of this network 67 . Accordingly, the neural correlates of overtrained temporal expectation may plausibly be interpreted within the framework of the prospective brain, which proposes that future events are mentally simulated by recombining associations acquired through past experience from episodic memory in order to generate predictions about the future 64,69 .However, the hippocampus was not found to be engaged by overtrained temporal expectations, yet proposed to be a central component of the core network supporting episodic future thinking 59,66,70 . This could be due to the very nature of our task design. The present study involved repeatedly simulating a relatively simple and highly probable future event concerning when the target stimulus would appear rather than the construction of complex environments typically used before 71,72 . Moreover, our multi-session design may have reduced hippocampal modulations as those appear to play its strongest role during the initial construction phase when future simulations are generated for the first time, with reduced involvement once the same simulations have been repeatedly constructed 73 –75 . Given repeated exposure to the same temporal 

environments across three consecutive days, episodic future simulations may have 

already been constructed during earlier sessions. Taking these findings into account, 

we propose that the application of overlearned temporal expectations might not only 

rely on the constructive recombination of episodic details that characterizes typical 

future simulations. Instead, overlearned temporal expectations may reflect the retrieval 

and reapplication of a previously established future simulation within the temporal 

environment in which it was originally acquired. From this perspective, overlearned 

temporal expectations may be conceptually related to prospective memory, that is, remembering to perform a specific action at a particular point in the future 76 , such as responding when a target is expected to occur after a particular delay. Of course, the neural signature of overlearned temporal expectations also shares neural features with other cognitive networks, such as prospective memory, which likewise includes BA10, BA11, and IPL 77,78 , as well as memory-guided attention, which has been associated with IPL and BA10 activity 79 –81 . However, the core network of episodic memory and simulation appeared to provide the best account of our findings, as it additionally includes regions implicated in future-oriented cognition, such as the RSC and vmPFC. To avoid the fallacy of reverse inference, we directly tested whether these regions have been consistently paired not only with episodic memory but also with cognitive 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

processes involving internally generated simulation, such as future simulation, mentalizing, and theory of mind. Using Neurosynth 37 for both peak-wise association tests and an unbiased, data-driven decoding of the entire unthresholded second-level statistical map, we indeed observed a highly convergent functional profile. Specifically, both the peak voxel associations and the correlations with the whole-brain activation pattern were linked to terms such as autobiographical memory, episodic memory, self-referential processing, mentalizing, theory of mind, retrieval, and construction. Notably, these terms describe cognitive processes that are widely considered to rely on internally generated simulations, enabling individuals to mentally project themselves across time or into the perspectives of others, and are therefore closely related to episodic future-oriented cognition 65 . While such reverse inferences should be interpreted cautiously, the resulting cognitive profile converges on cognitive functions that have repeatedly been implicated in the prospective brain and the broader literature on episodic simulation, future-oriented and episodic cognition 38,39,65 and is also in line with behavioral accounts linking temporal expectation with trace theories of temporal preparation 31 . These brain pattern-concept associations therefore provide convergent support for our interpretation that overlearned temporal expectations engages neural mechanisms involved in the simulation of internally represented future episodes. 

Distinct contributions of left inferior parietal lobule subregions to 

overtrained temporal expectations 

Our findings further highlight the central role of the left IPL in overtrained 

temporal expectation. This region was associated with overtrained temporal 

expectations when additional cognitive processes were minimized by restricting 

the analysis to early trials and remained modulated when temporal expectations 

across both early and late trials were considered jointly, that is, when temporal 

expectations across all temporal environments were taken into account and 

additional cognitive processes could contribute to performance. Comparison of 

fMRI -modulations for trained vs untrained groups further indicate that the left IPL lobule switches preferences from late likely to early unlikely trials during training. Moreover, modulations within the left IPL were positively correlated with slower response times, suggesting that the left IPL contributes not only to the implementation of overtrained temporal expectations but also to the sustained maintenance of temporally specific action plans and the preparatory attentional states required for their execution. Although all eIects were localized within the left IPL, they formed spatially distinct clusters with only limited overlap, suggesting a measurable degree of functional heterogeneity within this region. 

No direct involvement of motor regions in overlearned temporal 

expectations 

Temporal expectation had also been linked not only to the left inferior parietal cortex, 

but also repeatedly to motor regions 7,8,10,12,13,82 –84 . Specifically, SMA and premotor cortex 

have been associated with temporal expectation not only in motor but also in 

perceptual tasks 85 , including rhythm prediction 86 and in optimizing future interactions 

with the environment through the preparation of motor responses 85 . Importantly, motor 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

and premotor regions have also been implicated in statistical learning of sequential 

regularities across a wide range of task designs 87 . This raises the possibility that the 

involvement of these regions in previous temporal expectation studies may partly 

reflect the acquisition of temporal regularities rather than the application of already 

established temporal expectations, as such studies have typically relied on single -session designs and averaged across trials within that session in which the observed temporal expectation esect necessarily includes ongoing learning of the underlying temporal structure. By contrast, in our multi-session design, learning might have been saturated after repeated exposure across days, as the underlying temporal structure has already become more familiar 88,89 . Consistent with this interpretation, we found no direct evidence that motor or premotor regions contribute to the application of overtrained temporal expectations. Note, however, that we used subject-specific response times as a covariate and observed variations associated with this explanatory variable in the left primary motor cortex, SMA, and pre-SMA, suggesting a role in faster responding. 

Temporal unexpectedness 

As expected, temporally unlikely targets elicited activity in a predominantly right-lateralized network including the temporoparietal junction, anterior insula, visual cortex, premotor cortex, and inferior frontal gyrus, among other regions. This pattern closely resembles networks previously associated with attentional reorienting and the detection of behaviorally relevant cross-modal changes in the environment 42,43 , thereby 

supporting the validity of our temporal expectation manipulation. Within a predictive 

coding framework, these activations may reflect processes involved in the detection of 

violations of (temporal ) predictions and the subsequent updating of internal models. In 

particular, the recruitment of the right anterior insula together with the right inferior 

frontal gyrus (pars opercularis, BA44), is consistent with a salience network that signals 

the occurrence of task relevant or unexpected stimuli and initiates cognitive control 

processes . The concurrent involvement of primary motor cortex, the SMA and pre -SMA, as well as premotor cortex, further suggests the engagement of mechanisms supporting the rapid updating and adjustment of action plans in response to unexpected events. In addition, right-lateralized supramarginal gyrus activity might reflect attentional reorienting to unexpected stimuli . Enhanced fMRI-signals in visual cortices likely reflects enhanced sensory responses to unexpected stimuli, a well-established effect in accord with predictive coding. All these regions appeared to remain responsive to temporal unlikeliness after excessive training, suggesting that these regions contribute to the detection of expectancy violations even in an overtrained state rather than to the implementation of established temporal predictions. The enhanced involvement of inferior frontal and temporoparietal regions especially for late trials may indicate that additional processes including temporal reallocation, surprise ad updating might be computed there. This interpretation is in agreement with recent fMRI-studies focusing on expectation violation which related the right temporoparietal junction to attentional reallocation using fMRI and EEG 43 ; while others highlighted the role of frontal and 

parietal regions in surprise and updating 51 .

Within the framework of predictive coding it has been proposed that putatively 

enhanced neural signals for unexpected relative to expected trials may reflect a 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

dampening of expected rather than the enhancement of unexpected signals ; though 

response sharpening as a function of expectation has also been observed 90 . In our 

study a more nuanced picture emerged regarding the neural underpinnings of temporal 

expectations outside sensory areas. First, we identified a con sisten t network of regions 

instrumental in the application of overlearned expectations: in left parietal areas 

overlearned expectations lead to increased expectancy -related fMRI-signals for early intervals together with stable expectancy-driven response for late intervals potentially suggesting response sharpening in this region. In frontal regions overall response dampening could be observed over time together with an increase in the diserential expectancy-related signal. This pattern of results evolves over time and thereby appears to maintain and utilize temporal expectations. Future studies are needed to diserentiate to which extent this emerging brain network is driven by passive observation, active training or a mixture of both. 

Conclusions 

Taken together, our findings indicate that the neural underpinnings of temporal expectations differ as a function of training status as the involvement of training-related brain regions may only become apparent once temporal expectations have been established and repeatedly utilized over extended periods of time. We further observed that brain regions commonly associated with episodic context-dependent future simulations are used to maintain and apply even simple expectations. This raises the possibility that learned cue–target intervals constitute a minimal representational scaffold of an episode. Rather than requiring rich scenes, narratives, or autobiographical content, the neural machinery commonly associated with episodic cognition may already be engaged by the encoding and retrieval of simple temporal relations between events. These cue-triggered recalled simulations may serve as a basis for predictions that guide goal-directed actions and optimize behavior. 

Methods 

Participants 

Participants were recruited at the Otto -von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Germany. The study protocol was approved by the local ethics committee. All participants provided informed written consent before participation and received monetary compensation for taking part in the study. Only participants were included if they reported no history of psychiatric or neurological disorder, no regular intake of medication known to interact with the central nervous system, normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no hearing impairments. Forty-two healthy volunteers participated in the study. From the final analysis, six participants were excluded due to technical issues during MRI data collection and one additional participant was excluded due to extreme parameter estimates identified during quality-control procedures, resulting in 35 participants (19 female, mean age = 26.4 y +/-5.2 standard deviation (SD)). For the control study, data from both an MRI cohort and an additional behavioral-only cohort were combined. Both cohorts completed an identical task using the same experimental procedure, disering only in the testing setting (inside vs. outside the MRI scanner). The MRI cohort comprised 16 participants (10 female, mean age = 23.3 y ± 4.5 SD), whereas the behavioral-only 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

cohort comprised 35 participants (26 female, mean age = 22.4 y ± 3.3 SD), resulting in a 

total control sample of 51 participants (36 female, mean age = 22.3 y +/ - 3.7 SD), 

Experimental procedure 

Our participants repeatedly performed two versions of a task across 5 sessions on 4 

consecutive days in the main experiment (Fig. 1). The control experiment was identical 

to the main experiment except that participants received no prior training or 

observations (no session 1 -4) and only performed one active session, either inside the MR-scanner (identical to session 5 in the main experiment) or outside the MR-scanner (identical two sessions 2-3 outside the scanner). On day 1 participants passively observed auditory and visual cue-target combinations inside the MRI-scanner (session 1; passive naive ), unaware of what would happen on the following days or the relational structure between the stimuli. On day 2 and 3 they were trained on visual target detection outside the MRI-scanner (session 2 and 3; active training ) and on day 4 they first passively observed the cue-target parings (session 4; passive trained ) before they actively detected visual targets again inside the MRI-scanner (session 5; active trained ). In the present article, we focus exclusively on session 5; analyses of the other MRI sessions are beyond the scope of the article and will be reported elsewhere. In all sessions, visual stimuli appeared at one of two possible time points after an auditory cue: either early (500 ms) or late (1500 ms). The likelihood of these two points in time was manipulated in a block-wise manner, with one block favoring early onsets (early:late ratio of 4:1) and the other favoring late onsets (early:late ratio of 1:4), see Fig. 1. These two block types (50 trials per block) alternated throughout the experiment. Within each block, one time interval was more likely (e.g., early in the early-likely block), while the other time interval was unlikely (e.g., late in the early-likely block). This block-wise manipulation established two distinct temporal environments: one in which early target onsets were more probable and another in which late target onsets were more probable. By structuring the experiment in this manner, we created an adaptive environment in which participants could form context-dependent temporal expectations based on the probabilistic structure of each environment. Participants were not informed at any point about the temporal relationship between the auditory and visual stimuli, nor were they explicitly told that the auditory stimulus could be used as a cue to predict the visual target. 

Stimuli and task 

Each session consisted of four runs, with 100 trials per run. Within every run, both the 

early -likely and late-likely blocks were presented, each containing 50 trials. In these blocks, the target appeared at the likely time point in 37 trials and at the unlikely time point in 13 trials. A trial began with the auditory cue (presented for 100 ms), followed by the target (also presented for 100 ms) at either the early or late time point (see Fig. 8). The starting block was counterbalanced across participants. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig 8 . Trial structure. Each trial began with an auditory cue (100 ms), followed after either 500 ms or 1500 ms by a
> visual target (100 ms).

Participants were asked to maintain fixation at all times, both during the passive and active sessions. In the active task, they were also instructed to respond as quickly as possible by pressing a button when they detected the target stimulus (see Fig. 8). In case a participant did not respond within 800 after target appearance, the response was considered missing. The following trial began after an inter-trial interval drawn from a truncated exponential distribution (minimum 0.5 s, maximum 8 s, discretized in steps of 0.1 s). For the main MRI-experiment, a predefined set of inter-trial intervals was used (based on design esiciency optimization 91 ). Both the cue-target time interval (early or late) of a trial and the block type ( early likely or late likely ) together determined whether the target was presented as early-likely, late-unlikely, late-likely, or early-unlikely. All stimuli were created and presented using the Psychophysics Toolbox 92 within MATLAB 2012b (MathWorks, Inc.) running on a Windows 7 environment. Visual targets consisted of circles filled with a checkerboard pattern (~10.3° of visual angle, 400 pixels diameter, changing from black to white every 25 pixels) and were centered in the upper third of the screen. Visual stimuli were displayed either via an LCD projector (resolution 1920 x 1080 pixels, frame rate = 60 Hz) on a screen placed at the rear opening of the bore of the MRI scanner, and viewed through a mirror mounted on the head coil (distance to screen = 35 cm) or via an LCD screen (22” 120 Hz, SAMSUNG 2233RZ) with adjusted resolution to 1920 x 1080 pixels and the refresh rate of 60 Hz in the behavioral laboratory (distance to screen = 103 cm). Auditory stimuli were clearly audible pure tones (8000 Hz) and presented via headphones (Sennheiser HD 650 in the behavioral laboratory, mark II-Box; MR CONFON in the scanner). The experiment had a dark grey background (RGB: 125) with a white fixation square (20 pixels) centered in the lower third of the screen. Participants responded with a wireless mouse (Logitech M325; behavioral laboratory) or with an MRI-compatible response box (Lumitouch; MR scanner). 

Behavioral data analysis 

The behavioral analyses examined how response times varied for likely and unlikely 

presented targets, with a specific focus on early targets 48,93 to assess the temporal 

expectation effect on response times (e.g. shorter response times for likely presented 

targets compared to unlikely ones) ; and further whether effects would change with 

training status in accord with 8.

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

For the statistical analysis , we first used pre planned t-tests to investigate the diserence between early likely and early unlikely trials. In addition, we also performed a repeated measures ANOVA with likeliness (likely, unlikely) and run (1, 2, 3, 4) as within-subject factors to analyze the robustness of this esect over time. The same repeated measures ANOVAs were subsequently performed for late targets and the esects in the untrained group. Greenhouse-Geisser corrections were applied where necessary. To investigate the esect of training status, we used a linear mixed-esects model due to the unequal sample sizes between training groups and the presence of incomplete cells in the design. For early targets, response times were modeled as a function of likeliness, training status, and their interaction, with laboratory (inside, outside the scanner) included as an additional fixed esect. Subject was included as a random intercept: 

response time ∼ ( likeliness × 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠) + 𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦 + (1 ∨ subject) 

In order to correct for multiple comparisons, FDR correction was applied. A significance 

level of p < 0.05 was used to determine statistical significance. The behavioral analyses 

were performed using R Statistical Software (v4.1.2; R Core Team 2021) using the 

package afex 94 .

Neuroimaging data acquisition and preprocessing 

Magnetic resonance imaging was conducted on a Siemens Prisma 3 Tesla system 

(Erlangen, Germany) with a 64 -channel head coil for signal reception. T1-weighted structural images were acquired with an MPRAGE sequence using the following parameters: 1 × 1 × 1 mm3 voxel size, 256 × 256 × 192 matrix, 2.82 ms echo time, 2.5 s repetition time, 1.1 s inversion time, 7° flip angle, 140 Hz per pixel bandwidth, 7/8 partial Fourier, parallel imaging with a GRAPPA factor of 2, and 5:18-min scan duration. For functional imaging we used a multiband accelerated T2*-weighted echo-planar imaging sequence (multiband acceleration factor 2, repetition time = 2000 ms, echo time = 30 ms, flip angle = 80°, field of view = 220 mm, voxel size=2.2×2.2×2.2 mm, and no gap). During each of the functional runs we acquired 250 volumes. Per volume, 66 slices covering the whole brain, tilted by approximately 15° in z-direction relative to the anterior–posterior commissure plane were acquired in interleaved order. Data preprocessing was conducted using fMRIPrep 21.0.2 95 . T1-weighted structural images were corrected for intensity non-uniformity, and used as T1w-reference throughout the workflow. The T1w-reference was then skull-stripped, segmented and normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI 152) template. For functional imaging preprocessing, BOLD runs were slice-time corrected to the middle slice, were corrected for head-motion by applying beforehand estimated head-motion parameters and were then co-registered to the T1w reference. Resulting images were spatially normalized to MNI-space using ANTs’ antsRegistration in a multiscale, mutual-information based, nonlinear registration scheme and were then smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 8 mm full-width at half maximum (FWHM) via SPM12 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London, UK). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Neuroimaging data analysis 

For the statistical analysis of the fMRI data, we time -locked the onsets on the cue presentation to capture brain signals related to target expectation. The goals of the neuroimaging analyses were to identify brain areas linked to the differentiation of likely and unlikely events in the distinct temporal environments (time interval x likeliness). The first-level GLM was constructed, utilizing the hemodynamic response function (HRF), time derivatives (TD), and dispersion derivatives (DD) to model the BOLD signal. The model assessed the neural response to all four experimental conditions: early likely ,

early unlikely , late likely and late unlikely . This first-level GLM included those experimental conditions as predictors for all collected sessions combined. In addition, we included six movement parameters (estimated during realignment) per run as nuisance regressors. To assess the mean activity per condition, contrasts averaging across the four runs for each session were constructed on the first-level, and a session-wise flexible factorial with those mean activity per condition and additionally mean response time per condition and subject was performed on the group level. All analyses were performed using the canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF) using SPM12 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London, UK). All whole-brain results were thresholded at p < .001 (uncorrected) at the voxel level and corrected for multiple comparisons at the cluster level using family-wise error (FWE) correction (p < .05). Marsbar 96 was used for mean beta weight extraction. Post hoc tests were conducted using R Statistical Software (v4.1.2; R Core Team 2021) using the package afex 94 .fMRI-preprocessing and analysis of the fMRI-control study was identical to the main experiment. Due to the lower number of participants in the control study, the result maps from the critical comparison of the main experiment (likely > unlikely) were used as masks. Region-wise mean beta weights were extracted and analyzed using R (v4.1.2; R Core Team 2021). To assess whether the identified peak voxels for the contrast likely > unlikely 

corresponded to regions consistently associated with episodic cognition, we queried the Neurosynth 37 association map for the term episodic . For each peak voxel, the 

corresponding association z -score was extracted from the meta-analytic map. To further characterize the overall cognitive profile of the observed activation pattern, the unthresholded group-level statistical map for the contrast likely > unlikely was decoded using the Neurosynth Decoder 37 via NeuroVault 97 . The decoder quantifies the spatial 

similarity between the statistical map and meta -analytic activation maps associated with cognitive terms. 

Data availability statement 

Behavioral and neuroimaging data, experimental code, MATLAB scripts, and R scripts 

are available upon request. 

Funding and conflict of interest declaration 

This project was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG - SFB1436/ TP B06). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Linda Sempf : Writing – original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Peter Vavra : Writing – original draft, Methodology. Toemme Noesselt : Writing – original draft, Methodology, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. 

References 

1. Sinha, P., Vogelsang, L., Vogelsang, M., Yonas, A. & Diamond, S. The Temporal Scaffolding of Sensory Organization. Annu. Rev. Psychol. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-032525-040352 (2025) doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-032525-040352. 2. Nobre, A. C. & van Ede, F. Anticipated moments: temporal structure in attention. Nat. Rev. 

Neurosci. 19 , 34–48 (2018). 3. Daikoku, T., Kamermans, K. & Minatoya, M. Exploring cognitive individuality and the underlying creativity in statistical learning and phase entrainment. EXCLI J. 22 , 828–846 (2023). 4. Fiser, J. & Aslin, R. N. Statistical learning of higher-order temporal structure from visual shape sequences. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 28 , 458–467 (2002). 5. Conway, C. M. How does the brain learn environmental structure? Ten core principles for understanding the neurocognitive mechanisms of statistical learning. Neurosci. Biobehav. 

Rev. 112 , 279–299 (2020). 6. Frost, R., Armstrong, B. C., Siegelman, N. & Christiansen, M. H. Domain generality versus modality specificity: the paradox of statistical learning. Trends Cogn. Sci. 19 , 117–125 (2015). 7. Bueti, D., Bahrami, B., Walsh, V. & Rees, G. Encoding of temporal probabilities in the human brain. J. Neurosci. Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 30 , 4343–4352 (2010). 8. Mento, G. & Valenza, E. Spatiotemporal neurodynamics of automatic temporal expectancy in 9-month old infants. Sci. Rep. 6, 36525 (2016). 9. Zhu, J., Tian, K. J., Carrasco, M. & Denison, R. N. Temporal attention amplifies stimulus information in fronto-cingulate cortex at an intermediate processing stage. PNAS Nexus 3,pgae535 (2024). 10. Coull, J. T. Using Time-To-Contact information to assess potential collision modulates both visual and temporal prediction networks. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2, (2008). 11. Coull, J. T. & Nobre, A. C. Where and When to Pay Attention: The Neural Systems for Directing Attention to Spatial Locations and to Time Intervals as Revealed by Both PET and fMRI. J. Neurosci. 18 , 7426–7435 (1998). 12. Cui, X., Stetson, C., Montague, P. R. & Eagleman, D. M. Ready...go: Amplitude of the FMRI signal encodes expectation of cue arrival time. PLoS Biol. 7, e1000167 (2009). 13. Sakai, K. et al. What and When: Parallel and Convergent Processing in Motor Control. J. 

Neurosci. 20 , 2691–2700 (2000). 14. Terranova, S. et al. Cerebellar Direct Current Stimulation Reveals the Causal Role of the Cerebellum in Temporal Prediction. Cerebellum Lond. Engl. 23 , 1386–1398 (2024). 15. Grabenhorst, M., Poeppel, D. & Michalareas, G. Neural signatures of temporal anticipation in human cortex represent event probability density. Nat. Commun. 16 , 2602 (2025). 16. Auksztulewicz, R., Myers, N. E., Schnupp, J. W. & Nobre, A. C. Rhythmic Temporal Expectation Boosts Neural Activity by Increasing Neural Gain. J. Neurosci. Off. J. Soc. 

Neurosci. 39 , 9806–9817 (2019). 17. Bolger, D., Coull, J. T. & Schön, D. Metrical rhythm implicitly orients attention in time as indexed by improved target detection and left inferior parietal activation. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 

26 , 593–605 (2014). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18. Cotti, J., Rohenkohl, G., Stokes, M., Nobre, A. C. & Coull, J. T. Functionally dissociating temporal and motor components of response preparation in left intraparietal sulcus. 

NeuroImage 54 , 1221–1230 (2011). 19. Marchant, J. L. & Driver, J. Visual and audiovisual effects of isochronous timing on visual perception and brain activity. Cereb. Cortex N. Y. N 1991 23 , 1290–1298 (2013). 20. Assmus, A. et al. Left inferior parietal cortex integrates time and space during collision judgments. NeuroImage 20 , S82–S88 (2003). 21. Behrens, T. E. J., Woolrich, M. W., Walton, M. E. & Rushworth, M. F. S. Learning the value of information in an uncertain world. Nat. Neurosci. 10 , 1214–1221 (2007). 22. Bruckner, R., Heekeren, H. R. & Nassar, M. R. Understanding learning through uncertainty and bias. Commun. Psychol. 3, 24 (2025). 23. Nassar, M. R., Wilson, R. C., Heasly, B. & Gold, J. I. An Approximately Bayesian Delta-Rule Model Explains the Dynamics of Belief Updating in a Changing Environment. J. Neurosci. 30 ,12366–12378 (2010). 24. Friston, K. A theory of cortical responses. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 360 , 815–836 (2005). 25. Friston, K. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11 , 127–138 (2010). 26. Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P. & Pezzulo, G. Active Inference: A Process Theory. Neural Comput. 29 , 1–49 (2017). 27. Rao, R. P. N. & Ballard, D. H. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 79–87 (1999). 28. Fiser, J. & Aslin, R. N. Encoding multielement scenes: statistical learning of visual feature hierarchies. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 134 , 521–537 (2005). 29. Mento, G., Tarantino, V., Sarlo, M. & Bisiacchi, P. S. Automatic Temporal Expectancy: A High-Density Event-Related Potential Study. PLOS ONE 8, e62896 (2013). 30. Robert S. Woodworth. Experimental Psychology (Robert S. Woodworth) . (1938). 31. Los, S. A., Kruijne, W. & Meeter, M. Outlines of a multiple trace theory of temporal preparation. Front. Psychol. 5, 1058 (2014). 32. Ramayya, A. G., Buch, V., Richardson, A., Lucas, T. & Gold, J. I. Human response times are governed by dual anticipatory processes with distinct neural signatures. Commun. Biol. 8,124 (2025). 33. Coull, J. T., Cotti, J. & Vidal, F. Differential roles for parietal and frontal cortices in fixed versus evolving temporal expectations: Dissociating prior from posterior temporal probabilities with fMRI. NeuroImage 141 , 40–51 (2016). 34. Getty, D. J. Discrimination of short temporal intervals: A comparison of two models. 

Percept. Psychophys. 18 , 1–8 (1975). 35. Klemmer, E. T. Time uncertainty in simple reaction time. J. Exp. Psychol. 51 , 179–184 (1956). 36. Rohenkohl, G., Cravo, A. M., Wyart, V. & Nobre, A. C. Temporal Expectation Improves the Quality of Sensory Information. J. Neurosci. 32 , 8424–8428 (2012). 37. Yarkoni, T., Poldrack, R. A., Nichols, T. E., Van Essen, D. C. & Wager, T. D. Large-scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data. Nat. Methods 8, 665–670 (2011). 38. Clayton, N. S. & Russell, J. Looking for episodic memory in animals and young children: Prospects for a new minimalism. Neuropsychologia 47 , 2330–2340 (2009). 39. Perner, J. Episodic memory: Essential distinctions and developmental implications. in The 

Self in Time: Developmental Perspectives (Chris Moore, Karen Lemmon, Karen Skene, 2001). doi:https://doi.org/10.4324/9781410600684. 40. Suddendorf, T. & Corballis, M. C. Mental time travel and the evolution of the human mind. 

Genet. Soc. Gen. Psychol. Monogr. 123 , 133–167 (1997). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

41. Vilberg, K. L. & Rugg, M. D. Memory retrieval and the parietal cortex: A review of evidence from a dual-process perspective. Neuropsychologia 46 , 1787–1799 (2008). 42. Downar, J., Crawley, A. P., Mikulis, D. J. & Davis, K. D. A multimodal cortical network for the detection of changes in the sensory environment. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 277–283 (2000). 43. Das, S. et al. The Ventral Attention Network Mediates Attentional Reorienting to Cross-Modal Expectancy Violations: Evidence from EEG and fMRI. J. Neurosci. 46 , e0720252026 (2026). 44. Echeverria-Altuna, I., Nobre, A. C. & Boettcher, S. E. P. Goal-Dependent Use of Temporal Regularities to Orient Attention under Spatial and Action Uncertainty. J. Cogn. 7, 37 (2024). 45. Rimmele, J., Jolsvai, H. & Sussman, E. Auditory target detection is affected by implicit temporal and spatial expectations. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 23 , 1136–1147 (2011). 46. Kong, D., Asplund, C. L., Ling, A. & Chee, M. W. L. Increased Automaticity and Altered Temporal Preparation Following Sleep Deprivation. Sleep 38 , 1219–1227 (2015). 47. Niemi, P. & Näätänen, R. Foreperiod and simple reaction time. Psychol. Bull. 89 , 133–162 (1981). 48. Ball, F., Fuehrmann, F., Stratil, F. & Noesselt, T. Phasic and sustained interactions of multisensory interplay and temporal expectation. Sci. Rep. 8, 10208 (2018). 49. Lange, K. & Röder, B. Orienting Attention to Points in Time Improves Stimulus Processing Both within and across Modalities. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 18 , 715–729 (2006). 50. Feldman, H. & Friston, K. J. Attention, Uncertainty, and Free-Energy. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 

4, (2010). 51. Visalli, A., Capizzi, M., Ambrosini, E., Mazzonetto, I. & Vallesi, A. Bayesian modeling of temporal expectations in the human brain. NeuroImage 202 , 116097 (2019). 52. Blaxton, T. A. et al. Functional mapping of human memory using PET: Comparisons of conceptual and perceptual tasks. Can. J. Exp. Psychol. Rev. Can. Psychol. Exp érimentale 

50 , 42–56 (1996). 53. Christoff, K. & Gabrieli, J. D. E. The frontopolar cortex and human cognition: Evidence for a rostrocaudal hierarchical organization within the human prefrontal cortex. Psychobiology 

28 , 168–186 (2000). 54. Ramnani, N. & Owen, A. M. Anterior prefrontal cortex: insights into function from anatomy and neuroimaging. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5, 184–194 (2004). 55. Guan, Z. et al. Neural Representation of Exogenous and Endogenous Temporal Expectations Based on FMRI. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 32 , e70864 (2026). 56. Azarias, F. R., Almeida, G. H. D. R., de Melo, L. F., Rici, R. E. G. & Maria, D. A. The Journey of the Default Mode Network: Development, Function, and Impact on Mental Health. Biology 

14 , 395 (2025). 57. Kucyi, A. & Davis, K. D. Dynamic functional connectivity of the default mode network tracks daydreaming. NeuroImage 100 , 471–480 (2014). 58. Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Sepulcre, J., Poulin, R. & Buckner, R. L. Functional-anatomic fractionation of the brain’s default network. Neuron 65 , 550–562 (2010). 59. Addis, D. R., Cheng, T., Roberts, R. P. & Schacter, D. L. Hippocampal contributions to the episodic simulation of specific and general future events. Hippocampus 21 , 1045–1052 (2011). 60. D’Argembeau, A., Xue, G., Lu, Z.-L., Van der Linden, M. & Bechara, A. Neural correlates of envisioning emotional events in the near and far future. NeuroImage 40 , 398–407 (2008). 61. Hassabis, D., Kumaran, D. & Maguire, E. A. Using Imagination to Understand the Neural Basis of Episodic Memory. J. Neurosci. 27 , 14365–14374 (2007). 62. Thakral, P. P., Madore, K. P. & Schacter, D. L. The core episodic simulation network dissociates as a function of subjective experience and objective content. Neuropsychologia 

136 , 107263 (2020). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

63. Van Hoeck, N. et al. Counterfactual thinking: an fMRI study on changing the past for a better future. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 8, 556–564 (2013). 64. Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R. & Buckner, R. L. Episodic simulation of future events: concepts, data, and applications. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1124 , 39–60 (2008). 65. Buckner, R. L. & Carroll, D. C. Self-projection and the brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11 , 49–57 (2007). 66. Benoit, R. G. & Schacter, D. L. Specifying the core network supporting episodic simulation and episodic memory by activation likelihood estimation. Neuropsychologia 75 , 450–457 (2015). 67. Stawarczyk, D. & D’Argembeau, A. Neural correlates of personal goal processing during episodic future thinking and mind-wandering: An ALE meta-analysis. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36 ,2928–2947 (2015). 68. Thakral, P. P., Madore, K. P. & Schacter, D. L. A Role for the Left Angular Gyrus in Episodic Simulation and Memory. J. Neurosci. Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 37 , 8142–8149 (2017). 69. Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R. & Buckner, R. L. Remembering the past to imagine the future: the prospective brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 657–661 (2007). 70. Race, E., Keane, M. M. & Verfaellie, M. Medial temporal lobe damage causes deficits in episodic memory and episodic future thinking not attributable to deficits in narrative construction. J. Neurosci. Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 31 , 10262–10269 (2011). 71. Addis, D. R. & Schacter, D. L. The Hippocampus and Imagining the Future: Where Do We Stand? Front. Hum. Neurosci. 5, (2012). 72. Weiler, J. A., Suchan, B. & Daum, I. Foreseeing the future: Occurrence probability of imagined future events modulates hippocampal activation. Hippocampus 20 , 685–690 (2010). 73. Addis, D. R., Wong, A. T. & Schacter, D. L. Remembering the past and imagining the future: Common and distinct neural substrates during event construction and elaboration. 

Neuropsychologia 45 , 1363–1377 (2007). 74. Botzung, A., Denkova, E. & Manning, L. Experiencing past and future personal events: functional neuroimaging evidence on the neural bases of mental time travel. Brain Cogn. 

66 , 202–212 (2008). 75. Okuda, J. et al. Thinking of the future and past: the roles of the frontal pole and the medial temporal lobes. NeuroImage 19 , 1369–1380 (2003). 76. Atance, C. M. & O’Neill, D. K. Episodic future thinking. Trends Cogn. Sci. 5, 533–539 (2001). 77. Burgess, P. W., Gonen-Yaacovi, G. & Volle, E. Functional neuroimaging studies of prospective memory: What have we learnt so far? Neuropsychologia 49 , 2246–2257 (2011). 78. Simons, J., Scholvinck, M., Gilbert, S., Frith, C. & Burgess, P. Differential components of prospective memory?Evidence from fMRI. Neuropsychologia 44 , 1388–1397 (2006). 79. Fischer, M., Moscovitch, M. & Alain, C. A systematic review and meta -analysis of memory -guided attention: Frontal and parietal activation suggests involvement of fronto -parietal networks. WIREs Cogn. Sci. 12 , e1546 (2021). 80. Rosen, M. L., Stern, C. E., Michalka, S. W., Devaney, K. J. & Somers, D. C. Cognitive Control Network Contributions to Memory-Guided Visual Attention. Cereb. Cortex 26 , 2059–2073 (2016). 81. Summerfield, J. J., Lepsien, J., Gitelman, D. R., Mesulam, M. M. & Nobre, A. C. Orienting attention based on long-term memory experience. Neuron 49 , 905–916 (2006). 82. Herbst, S. K., Fiedler, L. & Obleser, J. Tracking Temporal Hazard in the Human Electroencephalogram Using a Forward Encoding Model. eNeuro 5, ENEURO.0017-18.2018 (2018). 83. Nagai, Y. et al. Brain activity relating to the contingent negative variation: an fMRI investigation. NeuroImage 21 , 1232–1241 (2004). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.07.737020 doi: bioRxiv preprint

84. Pollok, B., Gross, J., Kamp, D. & Schnitzler, A. Evidence for anticipatory motor control within a cerebello-diencephalic-parietal network. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 20 , 828–840 (2008). 85. Coull, J. & Nobre, A. Dissociating explicit timing from temporal expectation with fMRI. Curr. 

Opin. Neurobiol. 18 , 137–144 (2008). 86. Schubotz, R. I. Neural bases of rhythm prediction. in Attention and Time (eds Nobre, A. C. & Coull, J. T.) 0 (Oxford University Press, 2010). doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199563456.003.0025. 87. Conway, C. M. & Pisoni, D. B. Neurocognitive basis of implicit learning of sequential structure and its relation to language processing. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1145 , 113–131 (2008). 88. Berkes, P., Orbán, G., Lengyel, M. & Fiser, J. Spontaneous cortical activity reveals hallmarks of an optimal internal model of the environment. Science 331 , 83–87 (2011). 89. Fiser, J., Berkes, P., Orbán, G. & Lengyel, M. Statistically optimal perception and learning: from behavior to neural representations. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14 , 119–130 (2010). 90. de Lange, F. P., Heilbron, M. & Kok, P. How Do Expectations Shape Perception? Trends Cogn. 

Sci. 22 , 764–779 (2018). 91. Hinrichs, H. et al. Deconvolution of Event-Related fMRI Responses in Fast-Rate Experimental Designs: Tracking Amplitude Variations. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 12 , 76–89 (2000). 92. Brainard, D. H. The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spat. Vis. 10 , 433–436 (1997). 93. Ball, F., Michels, L. E., Thiele, C. & Noesselt, T. The role of multisensory interplay in enabling temporal expectations. Cognition 170 , 130–146 (2018). 94. Singmann, H., Bolker, B., Westfall, J., Aust, F. & Ben-Shachar, M. S. afex: Analysis of Factorial Experiments. 1.5-1 https://doi.org/10.32614/CRAN.package.afex (2012). 95. Esteban, O. et al. fMRIPrep: a robust preprocessing pipeline for functional MRI. Nat. 

Methods 16 , 111–116 (2019). 96. Brett, M., Anton, J.-L., Valabregue, R. & Poline, J.-B. Region of interest analysis using an SPM toolbox. in (NeuroImage, 2002). 97. Gorgolewski, K. J. et al. NeuroVault.org: a web-based repository for collecting and sharing unthresholded statistical maps of the human brain. Front. Neuroinformatics 9, (2015).