Title: Pragmatics Meets Culture: Culturally-adapted Artwork Description Generation and Evaluation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02557v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:12:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Pragmatics Meets Culture: Culturally-adapted Artwork Description Generation and Evaluation 

Lingjun Zhao, Dayeon Ki, Marine Carpuat & Hal Daum´ e III 

Department of Computer Science University of Maryland College Park, Maryland, USA 

{lzhao123, dayeonki, marine, hal3 }@umd.edu 

Abstract 

Language models are known to exhibit various forms of cultural bias in decision-making tasks, yet much less is known about their degree of cul-tural familiarity in open-ended text generation tasks. In this paper, we introduce the task of culturally-adapted art description generation , where mod-els describe artworks for audiences from different cultural groups who vary in their familiarity with the cultural symbols and narratives embedded in the artwork. To evaluate cultural competence in this pragmatic generation task, we propose a framework based on culturally grounded question an-swering. We find that base models are only marginally adequate for this task, but, through a pragmatic speaker model, we can improve simulated listener comprehension by up to 8.2%. A human study further confirms that the model with higher pragmatic competence is rated as more helpful for comprehension by 8.0%. 1

1 Introduction 

Culture can be characterized as a shared system of knowledge that shapes everyday reason-ing and communication (Patterson, 2014). Effective cross-cultural communication relies on pragmatics, which includes the ability to anticipate differences in shared knowledge and select utterances that minimize miscommunication (Grice, 1975; Thomas, 2006; Kecskes, 2014). Similarly, when language models act as assistants, it is crucial that they communicate in a socially pragmatic manner, tailoring their messages to the listener’s perspective by accounting for prior knowledge, including cultural context (Ma et al., 2025). While prior work has introduced inference-based tasks (e.g., natural language inference, multiple-choice question answering) to assess language models’ cultural knowledge (Yin et al., 2021; Huang & Yang, 2023), there remains a gap in introducing a text generation task that is appropriate for a given listener’s cultural context to improve comprehension. Culturally-adapted text generation is challenging, particularly because the evaluation is difficult. Even when ground-truth annotations are available, reference-based evaluation metrics (e.g., BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002)) often fail to capture whether a model-generated text will be correctly interpreted by human listeners (Ma et al., 2025; Fried et al., 2023). In this paper, we introduce a new task and evaluation framework for culturally-adapted text generation, and study whether language models can self-improve pragmatic competence. First, we introduce a task for culturally-adapted text generation: generating descriptions of artwork tailored to different cultural audiences (§3.1), where we focus on American and Chinese cultural groups. This task is suited for studying culturally-adapted text generation because visual artworks often encode rich cultural meanings—such as symbolism, historical narratives—that are rarely explicit but are readily interpreted by culturally-attuned audi-ences (Oparaocha, 2022; Jain, 2017). As shown in Figure 1, a visual-language model (VLM) fails to explain the cultural symbolism of the lotus leaf in a Chinese artwork, limiting its 

> 1

Code and data will be released upon publication. 

1   

> arXiv:2604.02557v1 [cs.CL] 2 Apr 2026 Question : On this Yixing cup shaped as a large lotus leaf, what idea would a Qing dynasty scholar most directly reflect on while drinking tea or wine from it? (A) Winning military glory and expanding the empire’s borders (B) Accumulating wealth and worldly success through careful trade (C) Obeying strict household rules to preserve everyday discipline (D) Achieving immortality through secret Daoist alchemical practices (E) Escaping society entirely to live a life of solitary reclusion (F) Rising above muddy worldly affairs to maintain purity, integrity, and spiritual clarity ✅
> Task: Write a description in 75 words for an audience that identifies as culturally American and is interested in deepening their understanding of the artwork.
> Gemma 3 output: This exquisite Lotus Cup, crafted by Chen Mingyuan during the Qing dynasty, exemplifies Chinese ceramic artistry.The bowl form mimics a lotus flower, with delicately textured petals and a spout resembling a stem. A lotus pod base, perforated with drainage holes, supports the bloom. The reddish-brown glaze, characteristic of Yixing clay, highlights the piece organic form and reflects a reverence for nature central to Chinese aesthetics.

Figure 1: Example of a Gemma3-generated description of artwork for audiences unfamiliar with the cultural context. The description fails to explain the symbolism of the lotus leaf and therefore lacks evidence to help them answer the culturally-attuned question. ability to help an American audience understand the piece. Success in this generation task therefore hinges on pragmatic competence: the ability to adapt to the listener’s cultural common ground, bridge gaps in background knowledge, and facilitate comprehension. Second, we propose a framework for evaluating the pragmatic competence of language models that supports both automatic and human evaluation (§3.2). We hypothesize that the primary communicative goal of an description of artwork is to facilitate a listener’s under-standing of the artwork. To operationalize listener comprehension evaluation, we introduce an automated approach for constructing question–answering (QA) datasets grounded in the cultural symbols depicted in the artwork (§3.1). For automatic evaluation, we quantify pragmatic competence of VLMs by measuring the accuracy of an external simulated listener on the QA task when provided with each generated description. Finding that VLMs exhibit limited pragmatic competence under automatic evaluation (§6.1), we investigate whether they can self-improve their pragmatic competence. We propose a rational speech act–based approach (Goodman & Frank, 2016) in which the same model serves as both speaker and simulated listener, with the speaker selecting descriptions that maximize simulated listener comprehension (§4). Experimentally, we show that this self-improvement framework, when applied to Gemma3 (Team, 2025), LLaMA3.2 (Meta AI, 2024), and LLaVA - OneVision (Li et al., 2025a), consistently outperforms the base models and improves external simulated listener comprehension in QA task by up to 8.2% (§6.1). Finally, recognizing that simulated listeners may not fully reflect human listeners, we design and conduct a human evaluation to examine how descriptions of artwork affect human comprehension (§5.2, §6.2). Our results show that participants rate descriptions from the model with higher pragmatic competence as more helpful for understanding the artwork than those generated by the base model, with an improvement of 8.0%. We also observe differences between simulated listener and human in comprehension, highlighting the need for better alignment between simulated listener evaluations and human comprehension. 

2 Related Work 

Culturally aware language models. Prior work examines the capabilities of Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools for cross - cultural understanding of human language (Saha et al., 2025; Sarwari et al., 2024), while our focus is on adapting language models to audiences from different cultural backgrounds (Huang & Yang, 2023; Liu et al., 2025). Existing research analyzes cultural grounding in concepts (Liu et al., 2021; Yin et al., 2021; Thapliyal et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024; Khanuja et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025a) and values (Mohamed et al., 2022; 2024; Tao et al., 2024; Ki et al., 2025; Yadav et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025b), but these efforts emphasize inference rather than generation. In contrast, while Rooein et al. (2025) investigate cultural bias in generation, our goal is to bridge cultural knowledge gaps in generation. Shaikh et al. (2023) introduce a culturally grounded reference game with a limited vocabulary and action space. Our work presents a text generation task with a richer vocabulary. Culture is inherently multimodal—expressed through language, symbols, gestures, and artifacts (Liu et al., 2025; Pawar et al., 2025); motivated by this, we introduce a task on culturally meaningful visual symbols and study how language models use such cues for culturally aware text generation. 2Pragmatics in grounded language generation. Prior work in image captioning (Andreas & Klein, 2016; Cohn-Gordon et al., 2018; Tsvilodub & Franke, 2023; Bao et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2021) and grounded instruction generation (Fried et al., 2018; Dou & Peng, 2022; Zhao et al., 2023a) has primarily focused on contrastive reasoning—producing descriptions that distinguish a target image or trajectory from distractors—while assuming a uniform base of visual commonsense across audiences. However, pragmatic communication depends on audience-specific context, which can vary even when the visual input remains fixed. Our work addresses this gap by introducing a task and method that explicitly model audience differences and generate descriptions tailored to their distinct contextual expectations. 

Evaluating pragmatic language generation. Compared to question answering tasks that emphasize reasoning over context (Hu et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024), evaluating pragmatic language generation presents unique challenges. Standard reference-based metrics used in natural language generation often fail to capture whether the generated language will be correctly interpreted by human listeners (Ma et al., 2025; Fried et al., 2023), except in very simple cases—such as single-word outputs (Shaikh et al., 2023; White et al., 2024). To address this, researchers have modeled human responses using simulated users in domains like instruction generation and task-oriented dialogue (Lewis et al., 2017; Fried et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2023a; Kim et al., 2019). However, these evaluations are typically tied to specific datasets and task-specific metrics (e.g., scene reconstruction accuracy), making them difficult to generalize. Our work fills the gap of evaluating pragmatic success in language generation, by introducing a more general metric and automatic method for constructing evaluation datasets. 

Artwork in NLP. Art has long served as a challenging testbed for multimodal research, from early work on visual question-answering (VQA) (Guha et al., 2016; Garcia & Vogiatzis, 2018; Garcia et al., 2020) to recent efforts on cross-lingual (Ozaki et al., 2025) or cross-cultural artwork explanation with VLMs (Zhang et al., 2025b;a). Similarly, our work uses VLMs to generate descriptions of artwork, but focuses on culturally-adapted generation that explicitly aims to improve the pragmatic competence of these descriptions for diverse audiences. 

3 Culturally-adapted Text Generation Task and Evaluation 

In this paper, we introduce a culturally -adapted text generation task to help bridge this gap and present a dataset (§3.1). We propose an evaluation framework (§3.2), and further develop a theory -of - mind–based modeling approach to improve generation (§ 4). All relevant prompts are provided in §A.1. 

3.1 Culturally-adapted Artwork Description Generation: Task and Dataset 

We are interested in generating descriptions of artwork that adapt to human listeners from different culture backgrounds, since visual artworks often embed rich cultural meanings-such as symbolism and historical narratives-that are not explicitly stated but resonate with culturally-attuned audiences (Oparaocha, 2022; Jain, 2017). Generating effective descriptions of artwork requires two key capabilities: interpreting implicit cultural cues and adapting them to the cultural backgrounds of diverse listeners. This makes artwork description generation a compelling task for studying culturally-adapted text generation. Success in this task depends on pragmatic competence -the ability to adjust language to align with the common ground of a given cultural group. This task challenges VLMs to move beyond the assumption of a uniform context across all audiences. Instead, it requires them to generate culturally-adapted descriptions that reflect the common ground of specific cultural groups. 

Task. We consider a description generation task for VLMs that can generate descriptions and answer questions. An VLM M takes two components as input : an artwork image V, and a textual prompt P. The task is formulated by parameterizing P with (1) basic information I

about this artwork e.g., Title: {TITLE }, Artist: {ARTIST }, Date: {DATE } and (2) the cultural group L of a human listener, e.g. American or Chinese . The model then generates an artwork description as D to the human listener as output with probability M(D | V, P(I, L)) .3For example, we format the description generation prompt P as: P(I, L) = You will receive basic information about this artwork, and your task is to write an English description of the artwork in 75 words. The description should be tailored for an audience that identifies as culturally {L} and is interested in deepening their understanding of the artwork. Artwork information: {I}.

Dataset. To generate the description, we start from a museum dataset with 6,399 artworks that contains basic metadata and a short comment C for each visual artwork 2 We use the metadata to obtain I for the description generation task. We also use this dataset to construct a culturally-attuned question-answering dataset Deval 

to enable evaluation of a listener’s understanding of the artwork (§3.2). For each artwork, we first generate detailed background information B that emphasizes cultural aspects. To enrich B with embedded symbolism, we use GPT - 5 (Singh et al., 2025) to identify culture symbols S = ( S1, . . . , Sn) from the artwork, as symbolism often conveys rich cultural meaning (Oparaocha, 2022). On average, 1.9 symbols are identified per artwork (e.g., the lotus leaf in Figure 1). We then prompt GPT -5 with S and the associated comment C to generate the background, with an average length of 565 words. We design questions in Deval to probe the meanings of culture symbols S embedded in each artwork. Using GPT -5, we follow the practices recommended in Balepur et al. (2025) to generate multiple-choice question–answer triplets (Q, A, ˆA) conditioned on the artwork image V, generated background B, and symbols S. Q is a textual question that requires understanding of the cultural meaning of an artwork, A = ( A1, A2, ..., Am) are a set of possible answers to Q, and ˆA is the ground-truth answer to Q. One triplet is generated per culture symbol, with six candidate answers of similar length that are randomly shuffled (an example in Figure 1). As a control, we construct a culturally agnostic dataset Dagnostic using only the artwork image V, and we generate two triplets per artwork. For evaluation, we use subsets of American and Chinese artworks, aligning with the cultural backgrounds of human participants. Specifically, we include 224 American artworks created after 1900 and 57 Chinese artworks created after 1400, as symbolism in earlier works may be unfamiliar even to same-culture participants. In total, Deval contains 481 triplets, and 

Dagnostic contains 562 triplets. 

3.2 Evaluation Method for Pragmatic Description Generation 

To evaluate whether a generated artwork description fulfills its pragmatic communicative goal—facilitating comprehension conditioned on the listener’s cultural background— we need an automatic evaluation method to support model development. This evaluation method shall not require ground-truth description annotation, as such annotation is difficult to obtain. Additionally, classical reference-based automatic natural language generation metrics such as BLEU are unable to measure whether or not generated language will be understood correctly by human listeners (Krahmer & Theune, 2010; Zhao et al., 2021). There-fore, measuring the task success of simulated listener using the description is a promising approach (Fried et al., 2023). 

Question answering as evaluation. Previous work on measuring task success of prag-matic language generation tasks typically use human-annotated evaluation datasets, such as annotating target destination for grounded instruction generation, and target image for contrastive image captioning (Zhao et al., 2023b; Andreas & Klein, 2016). However, such annotations are difficult to obtain to measure artwork comprehension success, so we introduce a question-answering evaluation task to measure how well the model-generated description supports a listener’s comprehension as task success. We construct the question answering dataset Deval using GPT-5, as described in §3.1, an example is shown in Figure 1. This evaluation supports both simulated users and human users as listeners.  

> 2The public domain dataset is from https://www.artic.edu/open-access/open-access-images .

4LLM as a judge. For automatic evaluation of generated descriptions, we employ a sim-ulated listener whose role is to answer questions about an artwork using the description, approximating how a human listener from a specific cultural group would respond. We operationalize this simulated listener with a vision–language model Mjudge that is different 

from the description generation model M.A simulated listener Mjudge generates an entailment probability for each possible answer 

Ai, given an artwork image V and textual prompt P as input. P is parameterized by: (1) a provided description D, (2) a specific cultural group L of the simulated listener, (3) question 

Q about the artwork, and (4) answer Ai. In this task, the output of simulated listener Mjudge 

is Correct or Incorrect . The chosen answer is the one with the highest entailment probability: 

A∗ = arg max 

> Ai

Mjudge (Correct | V, P(D, L, Q, Ai)) (1) To measure the task success, we compare the optimal answer A∗ chosen by simulated listener Mjudge with the ground-truth answer ˆA.Our preliminary experiments show that the automatic evaluation method based on Eq 1 is not promising enough, as the model either ignores the description D or the listener’s cultural group L. To address this, we adopt a chain-of-thought–based evaluation strategy. For each candidate answer Ai, we provide two types of reasoning signals: (i) RL, reasoning about whether the listener’s cultural group L alone entails Ai in the absence of the description, and (ii) RD, reasoning about whether the description D entails Ai. Both RL and RD are generated by prompting simulated listener Mjudge (see §A.1 for details). Under this formulation, the final answer is selected as: 

A∗ = arg max 

> Ai

Mjudge (Correct | V, P(D, L, Q, Ai, RD, RL)) (2) However, when the simulated listener L can already determine the correctness of Ai con-fidently based solely on cultural knowledge, providing the description may introduce spurious or incorrect inferences. To address this issue, when L does not predict unsure for the answer entailment without description task (which also generates RL), we evaluate answers without using the description for chain-of-thought prompting (see §A.1). 

A∗ = arg max 

> Ai

Mjudge (Correct | V, P(L, Q, Ai, RL)) (3) 

4 Pragmatic Description Generation with Theory-of-Mind Modeling 

In this section, we describe our approach to generate pragmatic artwork description for the task in § 3.1. We first use role-playing persona prompting as our base speaker, and then use theory-of-mind modeling for pragmatic speaker, based on the rational speech act framework (Goodman & Frank, 2016; Fried et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2023b). 

● Base speaker. We use a pre-trained VLM M to generate a description D for the visual artwork V to a human listener from a specific cultural group L with probability M(D |

V, P(I, L)) , as described in §3.1. We use greedy decoding to generate description D.

● Pragmatic speaker. When describing the artwork to human listener from cultural group 

L, the pragmatic speaker chooses a description D∗ from the candidate description set that best enables L to comprehend the artwork. This process is illustrated in Figure 2. To do this, we randomly sample K descriptions from M using from the probability distribu-tion M(D | V, P(I, L)) to form the candidate description set D = {D1, ..., DK } ∪ { D}. Next, we use M again as simulated listener to answer questions related to the artwork, in order to approximate how human listener comprehend the artwork when provided a description Di:

D∗ = arg max  

> Di∈D

M(Correct | V, P(Di, L, Q, ˆ A)) (4) 5Pragmatic 

> Speaker
> Description
> D1
> Simulating Human Comprehension with QA Task
> Score

60% 

> Description
> D2
> Score

95% 

> Description
> D3
> Score

80% 

> Artwork
> Cultural Group
> What is this artwork about?
> Description
> D2

Figure 2: Our approach uses a self-improving speaker model to generate pragmatic artwork descriptions. Given an artwork and the listener’s cultural group, the pragmatic speaker first samples multiple descriptions, then ranks them by simulating how the listener would answer culturally-attuned questions when provided with each description. The model then selects the description with the highest self -evaluation score and presents it to the listener, either an external simulated listener or human listener. where M generates a probability M(Correct | V, P(Di, L, Q, ˆA)) that the ground-truth an-swer ˆA is entailed by the listener from a given cultural group L for the question Q. Q and ˆA are generated from §3.1. In this task, the output of simulated listener M is Correct or 

Incorrect . The pragmatic speaker chooses description D∗ as the one that has highest chance for the simulated listener to entail the correct answer. All prompts provided in §A.1. We also include the description generation likelihood to penalize potential hallucinations. Higher-likelihood descriptions also tend to be shorter, improving communication effi-ciency—an important pragmatic factor (Fried et al., 2023) beyond simulated listener com-prehension. To achieve this, we design pragmatic speaker to choose description D∗ as the one that maximizes a weighted product of probabilities under the description generation and simulated listener answer entailment: 

D∗ = arg max  

> Di∈D

M(Di | V, P(I, L)) λ

× M(Correct | V, P(Di, L, Q, ˆ A)) 1−λ

(5) where λ ∈ [0, 1 ] is a hyperparamter tuned on development set. 

5 Experimental Setup 

5.1 Models 

We evaluate three instruction-tuned VLMs for generating culturally-adapted artwork de-scriptions: (i) Gemma3 12B (Team, 2025), (ii) LLaMA3.2-Vision 11B (Meta AI, 2024), and (iii) LLaVA-OneVision 7B (Li et al., 2025a). For the base speaker , we use greedy decoding with a 75-word limit, truncating outputs exceeding this limit to the last complete sentence. For the pragmatic speaker , we sample 10 candidate descriptions under the same word limit at temperature 1.0 for Gemma and LLaMA, and 20 descriptions with temperature 1.2 for LLaVA. We use Qwen2.5 -VL 7B (Wu et al., 2025) as an external simulated user for evaluation. 

5.2 Human Evaluation Design 

Participants evaluate 12 artworks in stages: they first view the artwork alone and select any culture symbols they recognize, answering up to three questions about each (from §3.1). Next, they receive a description, sampled from either the base or pragmatic speaker model, and repeat the same tasks. Finally, both descriptions are shown side by side, and we ask participants for preference ratings: 1. Comprehension: which description better helps you understand the main meaning of the artwork (and its symbolism)? 2. Knowledge gain: which description provides more explanation of cultural symbols in the artwork that you did not already know? 6QA Accuracy Culturally-agnostic questions Culturally-attuned questions Speaker Model Listener Familiar Unfamiliar Familiar Unfamiliar                             

> No description 89.9 90.3 90.2 71.5 Base Gemma (Team, 2025) 89.6 89.9 88.6 73.2 Pragmatic Gemma 89.9 90.1 90.4 79.2 †
> Base LLaMA (Meta AI, 2024) 89.9 90.6 87.5 70.9 Pragmatic LLaMA 90.1 90.6 89.8 †74.0 Base LLaVA (Li et al., 2025a) 89.4 89.9 87.1 64.4 Pragmatic LLaVA 89.1 89.9 88.1 69.4 †

Table 1: Question-answering accuracy for culturally-agnostic and culturally-attuned artwork -related questions, using descriptions generated by different speaker models. An external simulated listener (Qwen2.5 - VL), either familiar or unfamiliar with the artwork’s culture, answers the questions. † denotes when the pragmatic model has significantly higher accuracy than the base model ( p < 0.05) as determined by a two-sample t-test. Takeaway: 

VLMs can self-improve their pragmatic competence when used as speaker models. 3. Prior knowledge: which description provides more explanation of cultural symbols in the artwork that you were already familiar with? To aid understanding of culture-specific content in Chinese artworks, we provide English-to-Chinese translations for culture-specific terms identified via GPT-4o (OpenAI et al., 2024) and resolved through Wikidata. Additionally, to help participants quickly identify differences between the two descriptions, we highlight sentence pairs with similar meanings using SimCSE (Gao et al., 2021) cosine similarity with threshold score of 0.8. Implementation details and survey screenshots are provided in §A.3. We designed our survey on Qualtrics 3 and recruited 10 participants from each of the two cultural groups (American and Chinese) via Prolific. 4 Each participant evaluates 12 artworks, including 2 quality-control tasks (explained in §6.1), and was compensated at a rate of $18/hour. Sessions failing below 75% accuracy are discarded. In total, we retained 20 valid sessions (240 data points). All procedures were approved by our institution’s IRB. 

6 Analysis 

We investigate the following questions: 1. Can visual-language models (VLMs) self-improve their pragmatic competence? 2. Do these improvements generalize to human judgments? To address Q1, we improve the model generated descriptions using theory-of-mind model-ing, and evaluate them through an external simulated user study. To answer Q2, we design and conduct a human evaluation. 

6.1 Can VLMs Self-improve Their Pragmatic Competence? 

We employ a VLM different from the speaker model as an external simulated listener (user) to evaluate the speaker’s pragmatic competence, providing each speaker generated description when answering questions about an artwork (§ 3.2). See § 4 for the speaker models. Results are reported in Table 1, distinguishing between culturally-attuned , which require specific cultural background knowledge to answer correctly, and culturally-agnostic 

> 3https://www.qualtrics.com/
> 4https://www.prolific.com/

7Figure 3: Human users preference rates for descriptions generated by the base speaker and the pragmatic speaker. Takeaway: The pragmatic speaker improves user comprehension and introduces new information, but insufficiently accounts for users’ existing knowledge.        

> Comprehension Knowledge Gain Prior Knowledge QA Accuracy Gain Self-eval. Score 0.08 (-0.06, 0.22) 0.04 (-0.10, 0.18) 0.06 (-0.08, 0.20) 0.15 (0.05, 0.25)

Table 2: Kendall’s τ correlation between model self-evaluation score (Eq 5), human prefer-ence over a pair of descriptions, and human QA accuracy gain from using the description versus not using it. Ranges are 95% confidence intervals. Takeaway: Model self - evaluation score has stronger correlation with human QA accuracy gain than with human preferences. questions, which serve as a control condition and do not rely on cultural knowledge (see §3.1). We partition results by the simulated listener’s cultural familiarity with the artwork: the familiar condition corresponds to users whose cultural group matches that of the artwork, while the unfamiliar condition corresponds to users from a different cultural group. 

Performance on control conditions. Across all models and settings, QA accuracy on culturally-agnostic questions remains consistently high and similar between familiar and unfamiliar simulated listeners, regardless of whether a description is provided. This con-firms that these questions are indeed culturally agnostic, as neither cultural group nor descriptions play a role in these control conditions. For culturally-attuned questions in the familiar condition, there are often modest differences across rows. This is expected: listeners who already possess the relevant cultural knowledge can answer these questions reliably even without additional descriptions, limiting the potential benefits of generated descriptions. 

VLMs can self-improve pragmatic competence. For culturally-attuned questions, unfa-miliar listeners perform much worse than familiar listeners when no description is provided, reflecting the lack of requisite cultural knowledge. For the unfamiliar listeners, providing descriptions from the base Gemma speaker yields only minor improvements over the no description condition, suggesting these descriptions are insufficiently culturally-adapted to support comprehension. By comparison, descriptions from by the pragmatic Gemma speaker lead to a substantial improvement in QA accuracy over the base model (73.2 to 79.2). This gain indicates that the pragmatic model produces more culturally-adapted descriptions with improved pragmatic competence, enabling listeners outside the culture to answer culturally-attuned questions more accurately. We observe a similar trend for the LLaMA. For LLaVA, base model descriptions has lower performance relative to the no description condition, suggesting that suboptimal descriptions can hinder comprehension. The pragmatic LLaVA model mitigates this degradation, but overall performance remains bounded by the quality of the candidate description set. 

6.2 Do Simulation Improvements Generalize to Human Judgments? 

We conduct human evaluation on descriptions generated by Gemma, as it achieves the highest accuracy on the culturally-attuned dataset in the simulated listener evaluation (§6.1). 8Question : In the textile’s central Mexican coat of arms, how would late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century viewers in the United States most likely have understood the eagle’s meaning? (A) As an emblem referring only to Aztec religion and not to any modern nation (B) As a sign that Mexico wished to give up its sovereignty to foreign rule (C) As a symbol of peaceful trade with European colonial powers (D) As a reminder that Mexico was culturally dependent on the United States (E) As a purely mythical bird with no political meaning at all (F) As a claim that Mexico, like the United States, was a strong and independent nation ✅

Base Gemma: This intricate hanging, likely crafted in Mexico or the United States around the late 19th century, presents a fascinating blend of storytelling and symbolism. Numerous small, painted scenes are arranged like puzzle pieces, depicting biblical narratives and historical events. At the center, the Mexican eagle emblem, a national symbol, is prominently displayed. [Accuracy = 0.7] 

Pragmatic Gemma: This vibrant hanging showcases a unique blend of Mexican and American cultural imagery. Small, painted scenes - depicting historical events, religious stories, and everyday life - are arranged in a patchwork design against a golden background. At the center lies the Mexican national emblem, an eagle devouring a serpent, symbolizing triumph and independence. Notice the careful details and diverse narratives, reflecting a period of cultural exchange and artistic innovation between these neighboring regions. [Accuracy = 1.0] (a) The base model fails to generate descriptions that help culturally unfamiliar audiences answer the question, whereas the pragmatic model succeeds. Consistently, the simulated listener predicts that the base speaker’s description is insufficient (choosing A), while the pragmatic model’s description enables a correct response (choosing F). Question : In this modern American landscape photograph, what does the dead tree most directly symbolize within the wider history of the American West and Dust Bowl era? (A) The romantic beauty of untouched, pristine and fertile nature (B) Religious salvation promised to settlers who endure harsh climates (C) Technological progress and the triumph of industry over wilderness (D) Mortality and environmental erosion linked to overuse of the land and the costs of expansion ✅

(E) The rebirth of frontier communities after successful homesteading (F) The scientific management of forests through careful conservation 

Base Gemma: This stark black and white photograph, "The Dying Chestnut Tree — My Teacher," captures the poignant beauty of decline. Stieglitz, an American artist, presents a weathered branch, stark against a pale sky, evoking a sense of resilience amidst loss. The intricate network of bare limbs speaks to enduring strength, while the decaying wood hints at the cyclical nature of life and death familiar concept in Chinese philosophy. [Accuracy = 0.5] 

Pragmatic Gemma: This photograph, "The Dying Chestnut Tree — My Teacher," captures the stark beauty of loss and resilience. Stieglitz, an American artist, portrays a gnarled, leafless chestnut branch against a pale sky, reminiscent of a weathered elder. It evokes themes of impermanence and the profound wisdom found in enduring hardship – a sentiment deeply resonant in Chinese philosophy. The careful composition conveys both decay and a stubborn continuation of life, inviting contemplation on life's cycles and quiet strength. [Accuracy = 1.0] 

(b) Both descriptions for culturally unfamiliar audiences lack sufficient evidence to support the correct answer. The simulator’s justification for option D using the pragmatic model’s description is weak—“The introduction discusses themes of loss, resilience, and endurance, which align with the proposed answer.”—yet it still assigns D the highest probability (0.5; Eq 2) among the options. 

Figure 4: The pragmatic speaker outperforms the base speaker in question-answering under an external simulated listener, both when (a) the listener aligns with human understanding and when (b) it does not. Colors denote semantically similar sentences. 

Preference ratings. As shown in Figure 3, participants prefer pragmatic speaker descriptions over base speaker descriptions in terms of improving their comprehension of the artwork, and providing more informative explanations of unfamiliar cultural symbols. This suggests the model with higher simulated pragmatic competence also tend to be more helpful for human understanding. At the same time, descriptions from the pragmatic speaker model more often include explanations of cultural symbols that users already know, indicating redundancy. This points to a direction for future work: improving the pragmatic speaker’s ability to tailor explanations more precisely to a human user’s existing knowledge. 

Qualitative examples. Figure 4 presents qualitative examples highlighting cases where the external simulated listener’s interpretation of a description aligns with or diverges from that of a human user. It demonstrates difference between simulated and human understanding when descriptions are provided. User QA accuracy is provided in §A.2. 

Ablation: Correlation analysis. Effective theory-of-mind modeling requires alignment between the model’s simulated listener understanding and human comprehension. To assess this, we analyze correlations between the model’s self-evaluated comprehension score (Eq 5) and human preference judgments across description pairs for the same artwork (Table 2). We observe very weak correlations with human preferences, but stronger correlations with human QA accuracy gains, consistent with the self-evaluation metric being grounded in the QA task. This highlights the need for future research in developing simulated user metrics that better align with human judgments. 

7 Conclusion 

We introduce a new task for culturally-adapted text generation using artworks, as they often embed cultural meanings. We propose an evaluation framework for pragmatic competence, 9framing the communication goal as facilitating the listener’s understanding. We further present a self-improvement approach that enables language models to enhance their prag-matic competence, and demonstrate its effectiveness through simulated listener evaluations and human preference judgments. Finally, we show that generated descriptions influence human comprehension differently than simulated user comprehension, underscoring the need for better alignment between simulated and human users. 

Acknowledgments 

This material is supported by the NSF under Grant No. 2229885 (NSF Institute for Trustwor-thy AI in Law and Society, TRAILS). We thank Yu Hou for suggestion on human evaluation interface, and Mark Riedl and Zichao Wang for discussion on pragmatics. 

References 

Jacob Andreas and Dan Klein. Reasoning about pragmatics with neural listeners and speakers. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 1173–1182, 2016. Nishant Balepur, Rachel Rudinger, and Jordan Lee Boyd-Graber. Which of these best describes multiple choice evaluation with llms? a) forced b) flawed c) fixable d) all of the above. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 3394–3418, Vienna, Austria, 2025. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.169. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.169/ .Yuwei Bao, Sayan Ghosh, and Joyce Chai. Learning to mediate disparities towards pragmatic communication. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), 

Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 2829–2842, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.202. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022. acl-long.202/ .Reuben Cohn-Gordon, Noah Goodman, and Christopher Potts. Pragmatically informative image captioning with character-level inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pp. 439–443, 2018. Zi-Yi Dou and Nanyun Peng. Foam: A follower-aware speaker model for vision-and-language navigation. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pp. 4332–4340, 2022. Daniel Fried, Jacob Andreas, and Dan Klein. Unified pragmatic models for generating and following instructions. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pp. 1951–1963, 2018. Daniel Fried, Nicholas Tomlin, Jennifer Hu, Roma Patel, and Aida Nematzadeh. Pragmatics in language grounding: Phenomena, tasks, and modeling approaches. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pp. 12619–12640, 2023. Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. Simcse: Simple contrastive learning of sentence embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2021 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pp. 6894–6910, 2021. Noa Garcia and George Vogiatzis. How to read paintings: Semantic art understanding with multi-modal retrieval. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2018 Workshops: Munich, Germany, September 8-14, 2018, Proceedings, Part II , pp. 676–691, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2018. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-030-11011-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-11012-3 52. URL https://doi. org/10.1007/978-3-030-11012-3 52 .10 Noa Garcia, Chentao Ye, Zihua Liu, Qingtao Hu, Mayu Otani, Chenhui Chu, Yuta Nakashima, and Teruko Mitamura. A dataset and baselines for visual question an-swering on art. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2020 Workshops: Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part II , pp. 92–108, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2020. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-030-66095-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-66096-3 8. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-030-66096-3 8 .Noah D Goodman and Michael C Frank. Pragmatic language interpretation as probabilistic inference. Trends in cognitive sciences , 20(11):818–829, 2016. Herbert P Grice. Logic and conversation. In Speech acts , pp. 41–58. Brill, 1975. Anupam Guha, Mohit Iyyer, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. “a distorted skull lies in the bottom center...” identifying paintings from text descriptions. In Mohit Iyyer, He He, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Hal Daum ´e III (eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop on Human-Computer Question Answering , pp. 43–47, San Diego, California, June 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W16-0107. URL https://aclanthology.org/W16-0107/ .Jennifer Hu, Sammy Floyd, Olessia Jouravlev, Evelina Fedorenko, and Edward Gibson. A fine-grained comparison of pragmatic language understanding in humans and language models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 4194–4213, 2023. Jing Huang and Diyi Yang. Culturally aware natural language inference. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pp. 7591–7609, 2023. Aditi Jain. Role of narration in visual arts from history to contemporary. International Journal of Applied Research , 3(8):877–882, 2017. URL https://www.allresearchjournal. com/archives/2017/vol3issue8/PartK/7-5-41-853.pdf .Istvan Kecskes. Intercultural pragmatics . OUP Us, 2014. Simran Khanuja, Sathyanarayanan Ramamoorthy, Yueqi Song, and Graham Neubig. An image speaks a thousand words, but can everyone listen? on image transcreation for cultural relevance. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 10258–10279, 2024. Dayeon Ki, Rachel Rudinger, Tianyi Zhou, and Marine Carpuat. Multiple llm agents debate for equitable cultural alignment. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 24841–24877, 2025. Jin-Hwa Kim, Nikita Kitaev, Xinlei Chen, Marcus Rohrbach, Byoung-Tak Zhang, Yuandong Tian, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Codraw: Collaborative drawing as a testbed for grounded goal-driven communication. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pp. 6495–6513, 2019. Emiel Krahmer and Mari ¨et Theune. Empirical Methods in Natural Language Generation .Springer, 2010. Mike Lewis, Denis Yarats, Yann Dauphin, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Deal or no deal? end-to-end learning of negotiation dialogues. In Martha Palmer, Rebecca Hwa, and Sebastian Riedel (eds.), Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 2443–2453, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D17-1259. URL https: //aclanthology.org/D17-1259/ .Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Peiyuan Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei Liu, and Chunyuan Li. LLaVA-onevision: Easy visual task transfer. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025a. ISSN 2835-8856. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=zKv8qULV6n .Cheng Li, Mengzhuo Chen, Jindong Wang, Sunayana Sitaram, and Xing Xie. Culturellm: In-corporating cultural differences into large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:84799–84838, 2025b. 11 Wenyan Li, Crystina Zhang, Jiaang Li, Qiwei Peng, Raphael Tang, Li Zhou, Weijia Zhang, Guimin Hu, Yifei Yuan, Anders Søgaard, et al. Foodieqa: A multimodal dataset for fine-grained understanding of chinese food culture. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 19077–19095, 2024. Chen Cecilia Liu, Iryna Gurevych, and Anna Korhonen. Culturally aware and adapted nlp: A taxonomy and a survey of the state of the art. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 13:652–689, 2025. Fangyu Liu, Emanuele Bugliarello, Edoardo Maria Ponti, Siva Reddy, Nigel Collier, and Desmond Elliott. Visually grounded reasoning across languages and cultures. In Pro-ceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 10467–10485, 2021. Bolei Ma, Yuting Li, Wei Zhou, Ziwei Gong, Yang Janet Liu, Katja Jasinskaja, Annemarie Friedrich, Julia Hirschberg, Frauke Kreuter, and Barbara Plank. Pragmatics in the era of large language models: A survey on datasets, evaluation, opportunities and challenges. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12378 , 2025. Meta AI. Llama 3.2-vision: Multimodal large language models. https://github.com/ meta-llama/llama-models/blob/main/models/llama3 2/MODEL CARD VISION.md , 2024. Accessed: 2026-03-02. Youssef Mohamed, Mohamed Abdelfattah, Shyma Alhuwaider, Feifan Li, Xiangliang Zhang, Kenneth Church, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Artelingo: A million emotion annotations of wikiart with emphasis on diversity over language and culture. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 8770–8785, 2022. Youssef Mohamed, Runjia Li, Ibrahim Sa’id Ahmad, Kilichbek Haydarov, Philip Torr, Kenneth Church, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. No culture left behind: Artelingo-28, a benchmark of wikiart with captions in 28 languages. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 20939–20962, 2024. Chile Oparaocha. Iconography and cultural symbolisms in art. International Journal of Scientific Research in Humanities Legal Studies and International Relations , 6(1), 2022. OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Mohammad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brak-man, Greg Brockman, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann, Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis, Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux, Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix, Sim ´on Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gibson, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hallacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu, Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Kamali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez, Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam 12 Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney, Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick, Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David M ´ely, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Rajeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe, Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny, Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl, Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Fran-cis Real, Kendra Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders, Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Selsam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor, Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky, Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang, Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thomp-son, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Preston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cer ´on Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vijayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng, Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Workman, Sher-win Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774 .Shintaro Ozaki, Kazuki Hayashi, Yusuke Sakai, Hidetaka Kamigaito, Katsuhiko Hayashi, and Taro Watanabe. Towards cross-lingual explanation of artwork in large-scale vision language models. In Luis Chiruzzo, Alan Ritter, and Lu Wang (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pp. 3773–3809, Albuquerque, New Mexico, April 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-195-7. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-naacl.209. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025. findings-naacl.209/ .Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Pierre Isabelle, Eugene Charniak, and Dekang Lin (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pp. 311–318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, July 2002. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/1073083.1073135. URL https://aclanthology. org/P02-1040/ .Dojun Park, Jiwoo Lee, Seohyun Park, Hyeyun Jeong, Youngeun Koo, Soonha Hwang, Seonwoo Park, and Sungeun Lee. Multiprageval: Multilingual pragmatic evaluation of large language models. In Proceedings of the 2nd GenBench Workshop on Generalisation (Benchmarking) in NLP , pp. 96–119, 2024. Orlando Patterson. Making sense of culture. Annual review of sociology , 40(1):1–30, 2014. Siddhesh Pawar, Junyeong Park, Jiho Jin, Arnav Arora, Junho Myung, Srishti Yadav, Faiz Ghifari Haznitrama, Inhwa Song, Alice Oh, and Isabelle Augenstein. Survey of cultural awareness in language models: Text and beyond. Computational Linguistics , 51(3): 907–1004, 2025. Peng Qi, Nina Du, Christopher Manning, and Jing Huang. PragmatiCQA: A dataset for pragmatic question answering in conversations. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pp. 6175–6191, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.385. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023. findings-acl.385/ .13 Donya Rooein, Vil ´em Zouhar, Debora Nozza, and Dirk Hovy. Biased tales: Cultural and topic bias in generating children’s stories. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 52–72, 2025. Sougata Saha, Saurabh Kumar Pandey, Harshit Gupta, and Monojit Choudhury. Reading between the lines: Can llms identify cross-cultural communication gaps? In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 8043–8067, 2025. Abdul Qahar Sarwari, Muhammad Naeem Javed, Hamedi Mohd Adnan, and Moham-mad Nubli Abdul Wahab. Assessment of the impacts of artificial intelligence (ai) on intercultural communication among postgraduate students in a multicultural university environment. Scientific Reports , 14(1):13849, 2024. Omar Shaikh, Caleb Ziems, William Held, Aryan Pariani, Fred Morstatter, and Diyi Yang. Modeling cross-cultural pragmatic inference with codenames duet. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pp. 6550–6569, 2023. Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, Akshay Nathan, Alan Luo, Alec Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Aleksandr Efremov, Aleksandra Spyra, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Karpenko, Alex Makelov, Alex Neitz, Alex Wei, Alexandra Barr, Alexandre Kirchmeyer, Alexey Ivanov, Alexi Christakis, Alistair Gillespie, Alli-son Tam, Ally Bennett, Alvin Wan, Alyssa Huang, Amy McDonald Sandjideh, Amy Yang, Ananya Kumar, Andre Saraiva, Andrea Vallone, Andrei Gheorghe, Andres Garcia Garcia, Andrew Braunstein, Andrew Liu, Andrew Schmidt, Andrey Mereskin, Andrey Mishchenko, Andy Applebaum, Andy Rogerson, Ann Rajan, Annie Wei, Anoop Kotha, Anubha Srivastava, Anushree Agrawal, Arun Vijayvergiya, Ashley Tyra, Ashvin Nair, Avi Nayak, Ben Eggers, Bessie Ji, Beth Hoover, Bill Chen, Blair Chen, Boaz Barak, Borys Minaiev, Botao Hao, Bowen Baker, Brad Lightcap, Brandon McKinzie, Brandon Wang, Brendan Quinn, Brian Fioca, Brian Hsu, Brian Yang, Brian Yu, Brian Zhang, Brittany Brenner, Callie Riggins Zetino, Cameron Raymond, Camillo Lugaresi, Carolina Paz, Cary Hudson, Cedric Whitney, Chak Li, Charles Chen, Charlotte Cole, Chelsea Voss, Chen Ding, Chen Shen, Chengdu Huang, Chris Colby, Chris Hallacy, Chris Koch, Chris Lu, Christina Kaplan, Christina Kim, CJ Minott-Henriques, Cliff Frey, Cody Yu, Coley Czarnecki, Colin Reid, Colin Wei, Cory Decareaux, Cristina Scheau, Cyril Zhang, Cyrus Forbes, Da Tang, Dakota Goldberg, Dan Roberts, Dana Palmie, Daniel Kappler, Daniel Levine, Daniel Wright, Dave Leo, David Lin, David Robinson, Declan Grabb, Derek Chen, Derek Lim, Derek Salama, Dibya Bhattacharjee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dinghua Li, Dingli Yu, DJ Strouse, Drew Williams, Dylan Hunn, Ed Bayes, Edwin Arbus, Ekin Akyurek, Elaine Ya Le, Elana Widmann, Eli Yani, Elizabeth Proehl, Enis Sert, Enoch Cheung, Eri Schwartz, Eric Han, Eric Jiang, Eric Mitchell, Eric Sigler, Eric Wallace, Erik Ritter, Erin Kavanaugh, Evan Mays, Evgenii Nikishin, Fangyuan Li, Felipe Petroski Such, Filipe de Avila Belbute Peres, Filippo Raso, Florent Bekerman, Foivos Tsimpourlas, Fotis Chantzis, Francis Song, Francis Zhang, Gaby Raila, Garrett McGrath, Gary Briggs, Gary Yang, Giambattista Parascandolo, Gildas Chabot, Grace Kim, Grace Zhao, Gregory Valiant, Guillaume Leclerc, Hadi Salman, Hanson Wang, Hao Sheng, Haoming Jiang, Haoyu Wang, Haozhun Jin, Harshit Sikchi, Heather Schmidt, Henry Aspegren, Honglin Chen, Huida Qiu, Hunter Lightman, Ian Covert, Ian Kivlichan, Ian Silber, Ian Sohl, Ibrahim Hammoud, Ignasi Clavera, Ikai Lan, Ilge Akkaya, Ilya Kostrikov, Irina Kofman, Isak Etinger, Ishaan Singal, Jackie Hehir, Jacob Huh, Jacqueline Pan, Jake Wilczynski, Jakub Pachocki, James Lee, James Quinn, Jamie Kiros, Janvi Kalra, Jasmyn Samaroo, Jason Wang, Jason Wolfe, Jay Chen, Jay Wang, Jean Harb, Jeffrey Han, Jeffrey Wang, Jennifer Zhao, Jeremy Chen, Jerene Yang, Jerry Tworek, Jesse Chand, Jessica Landon, Jessica Liang, Ji Lin, Jiancheng Liu, Jianfeng Wang, Jie Tang, Jihan Yin, Joanne Jang, Joel Morris, Joey Flynn, Johannes Ferstad, Johannes Heidecke, John Fishbein, John Hallman, Jonah Grant, Jonathan Chien, Jonathan Gordon, Jongsoo Park, Jordan Liss, Jos Kraaijeveld, Joseph Guay, Joseph Mo, Josh Lawson, Josh McGrath, Joshua Vendrow, Joy Jiao, Julian Lee, Julie Steele, Julie Wang, Junhua Mao, Kai Chen, Kai Hayashi, Kai Xiao, Kamyar Salahi, Kan Wu, Karan Sekhri, Karan Sharma, Karan Singhal, Karen Li, Kenny Nguyen, Keren Gu-Lemberg, Kevin King, Kevin Liu, Kevin Stone, Kevin 14 Yu, Kristen Ying, Kristian Georgiev, Kristie Lim, Kushal Tirumala, Kyle Miller, Lama Ahmad, Larry Lv, Laura Clare, Laurance Fauconnet, Lauren Itow, Lauren Yang, Laurentia Romaniuk, Leah Anise, Lee Byron, Leher Pathak, Leon Maksin, Leyan Lo, Leyton Ho, Li Jing, Liang Wu, Liang Xiong, Lien Mamitsuka, Lin Yang, Lindsay McCallum, Lindsey Held, Liz Bourgeois, Logan Engstrom, Lorenz Kuhn, Louis Feuvrier, Lu Zhang, Lucas Switzer, Lukas Kondraciuk, Lukasz Kaiser, Manas Joglekar, Mandeep Singh, Mandip Shah, Manuka Stratta, Marcus Williams, Mark Chen, Mark Sun, Marselus Cayton, Martin Li, Marvin Zhang, Marwan Aljubeh, Matt Nichols, Matthew Haines, Max Schwarzer, Mayank Gupta, Meghan Shah, Melody Huang, Meng Dong, Mengqing Wang, Mia Glaese, Micah Carroll, Michael Lampe, Michael Malek, Michael Sharman, Michael Zhang, Michele Wang, Michelle Pokrass, Mihai Florian, Mikhail Pavlov, Miles Wang, Ming Chen, Mingx-uan Wang, Minnia Feng, Mo Bavarian, Molly Lin, Moose Abdool, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Nacho Soto, Natalie Staudacher, Natan LaFontaine, Nathan Marwell, Nelson Liu, Nick Preston, Nick Turley, Nicklas Ansman, Nicole Blades, Nikil Pancha, Nikita Mikhaylin, Niko Felix, Nikunj Handa, Nishant Rai, Nitish Keskar, Noam Brown, Ofir Nachum, Oleg Boiko, Oleg Murk, Olivia Watkins, Oona Gleeson, Pamela Mishkin, Patryk Lesiewicz, Paul Baltescu, Pavel Belov, Peter Zhokhov, Philip Pronin, Phillip Guo, Phoebe Thacker, Qi Liu, Qiming Yuan, Qinghua Liu, Rachel Dias, Rachel Puckett, Rahul Arora, Ravi Teja Mullapudi, Raz Gaon, Reah Miyara, Rennie Song, Rishabh Aggarwal, RJ Marsan, Robel Yemiru, Robert Xiong, Rohan Kshirsagar, Rohan Nuttall, Roman Tsiupa, Ronen Eldan, Rose Wang, Roshan James, Roy Ziv, Rui Shu, Ruslan Nigmatullin, Saachi Jain, Saam Talaie, Sam Altman, Sam Arnesen, Sam Toizer, Sam Toyer, Samuel Miserendino, Sandhini Agarwal, Sarah Yoo, Savannah Heon, Scott Ethersmith, Sean Grove, Sean Taylor, Sebastien Bubeck, Sever Banesiu, Shaokyi Amdo, Shengjia Zhao, Sherwin Wu, Shibani Santurkar, Shiyu Zhao, Shraman Ray Chaudhuri, Shreyas Krishnaswamy, Shuaiqi, Xia, Shuyang Cheng, Shyamal Anadkat, Sim ´on Posada Fishman, Simon Tobin, Siyuan Fu, Somay Jain, Song Mei, Sonya Egoian, Spencer Kim, Spug Golden, SQ Mah, Steph Lin, Stephen Imm, Steve Sharpe, Steve Yadlowsky, Sulman Choudhry, Sungwon Eum, Suvansh Sanjeev, Tabarak Khan, Tal Stramer, Tao Wang, Tao Xin, Tarun Gogineni, Taya Christianson, Ted Sanders, Tejal Patwardhan, Thomas Degry, Thomas Shadwell, Tianfu Fu, Tianshi Gao, Timur Garipov, Tina Sriskandarajah, Toki Sherbakov, Tomer Kaftan, Tomo Hiratsuka, Tongzhou Wang, Tony Song, Tony Zhao, Troy Peterson, Val Kharitonov, Victoria Cher-nova, Vineet Kosaraju, Vishal Kuo, Vitchyr Pong, Vivek Verma, Vlad Petrov, Wanning Jiang, Weixing Zhang, Wenda Zhou, Wenlei Xie, Wenting Zhan, Wes McCabe, Will DePue, Will Ellsworth, Wulfie Bain, Wyatt Thompson, Xiangning Chen, Xiangyu Qi, Xin Xiang, Xinwei Shi, Yann Dubois, Yaodong Yu, Yara Khakbaz, Yifan Wu, Yilei Qian, Yin Tat Lee, Yinbo Chen, Yizhen Zhang, Yizhong Xiong, Yonglong Tian, Young Cha, Yu Bai, Yu Yang, Yuan Yuan, Yuanzhi Li, Yufeng Zhang, Yuguang Yang, Yujia Jin, Yun Jiang, Yunyun Wang, Yushi Wang, Yutian Liu, Zach Stubenvoll, Zehao Dou, Zheng Wu, and Zhigang Wang. Openai gpt-5 system card, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.03267 .Yan Tao, Olga Viberg, Ryan S Baker, and Ren ´e F Kizilcec. Cultural bias and cultural alignment of large language models. PNAS nexus , 3(9):pgae346, 2024. Gemma Team. Gemma 3. 2025. URL https://goo.gle/Gemma3Report .Ashish V Thapliyal, Jordi Pont Tuset, Xi Chen, and Radu Soricut. Crossmodal-3600: A massively multilingual multimodal evaluation dataset. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 715–729, 2022. Jenny Thomas. Cross-cultural pragmatic failure. World Englishes: Critical concepts in linguis-tics , 4(2):22, 2006. Polina Tsvilodub and Michael Franke. Evaluating pragmatic abilities of image captioners on a3ds. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pp. 1277–1285, 2023. Rose Wang, Julia White, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. Calibrate your listeners! robust communication-based training for pragmatic speakers. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021 , pp. 977–984, 2021. 15 Isadora White, Sashrika Pandey, and Michelle Pan. Communicate to play: Pragmatic reasoning for efficient cross-cultural communication. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pp. 12201–12216, 2024. Chenfei Wu, Jiahao Li, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kaiyuan Gao, Kun Yan, Sheng-ming Yin, Shuai Bai, Xiao Xu, Yilei Chen, et al. Qwen-image technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02324 , 2025. Srishti Yadav, Zhi Zhang, Daniel Hershcovich, and Ekaterina Shutova. Beyond words: Exploring cultural value sensitivity in multimodal models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pp. 7592–7608, 2025. Da Yin, Liunian Harold Li, Ziniu Hu, Nanyun Peng, and Kai-Wei Chang. Broaden the vision: Geo-diverse visual commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 2115–2129, 2021. Chenhao Zhang, Xi Feng, Yuelin Bai, Xeron Du, Jinchang Hou, Kaixin Deng, Guangzeng Han, Qinrui Li, Bingli Wang, Jiaheng Liu, Xingwei Qu, Yifei Zhang, Qixuan Zhao, Yiming Liang, Ziqiang Liu, Feiteng Fang, Min Yang, Wenhao Huang, Chenghua Lin, Ge Zhang, and Shiwen Ni. Can MLLMs understand the deep implication behind Chinese images? In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (eds.), Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 14369–14402, Vienna, Austria, July 2025a. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-251-0. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.700. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.700/ .Tuo Zhang, Tiantian Feng, Yibin Ni, Mengqin Cao, Ruying Liu, Kiana Avestimehr, Katharine Butler, Yanjun Weng, Mi Zhang, Shrikanth Narayanan, and Salman Avestimehr. Creating a lens of Chinese culture: A multimodal dataset for Chinese pun rebus art understanding. In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pp. 22473–22487, Vienna, Austria, July 2025b. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-256-5. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.1155. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025. findings-acl.1155/ .Lingjun Zhao, Khanh Nguyen, and Hal Daum ´e III. Define, evaluate, and improve task-oriented cognitive capabilities for instruction generation models. In Findings of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pp. 3688–3706, 2023a. Lingjun Zhao, Khanh Nguyen, and Hal Daum ´e Iii. Define, evaluate, and improve task-oriented cognitive capabilities for instruction generation models. In Findings of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pp. 3688–3706, 2023b. Ming Zhao, Peter Anderson, Vihan Jain, Su Wang, Alexander Ku, Jason Baldridge, and Eu-gene Ie. On the evaluation of vision-and-language navigation instructions. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume , pp. 1302–1316, 2021. 16 A Appendix 

A.1 Prompts Simulated Listener Entailment Task (Eq 1). We use the following entailment prompt for the simulated listener if the L is the American cultural group, and use a Chinese translated version if L is the Chinese cultural group: 

**Task:** Imagine you are an {L}, also consider yourself culturally {L} and are {FAMILIARITY}. Your job is to decide whether the proposed answer is 'Correct ' or 'Incorrect ' based on both the artwork and its introduction. Others will read your evaluation, so ensure it reflects the perspective of the persona described above. **Inputs:** 1. Question: {Q} 2. Introduction to the artwork: {D} 3. Proposed answer: {A_i} **Assessments:** The answer is (exactly one word: Correct or Incorrect; no additional text): 

where the L is a specified cultural group of the simulated listener, Q is a textual question related to the artwork, D is a provided artwork description, Ai is a possible answer to the question Q.

Simulated Listener Entailment Task using Chain-of-thought (Eq 2). We first prompt the simulated user from culture L to generate whether they will entail the answer and why: 

**Task:** Imagine you are an {L}, also consider yourself culturally {L} and are {FAMILIARITY}. Your job is to evaluate whether a proposed answer to a question about an artwork is correct based solely on what is visible in the artwork (without any external information): - If you can confidently judge based on what is visible and your cultural knowledge, conclude correct or incorrect. - If the artwork does not provide enough information or you lack the knowledge to decide, conclude unsure. - Always mention the proposed answer directly in the reasoning, stating whether what is visible in the artwork supports, contradicts, or is insufficient to judge the proposed answer. Others will read your evaluation, so ensure it reflects the perspective of the persona described above. Return your answer as a single JSON string only, do not include ``` json or any extra text. Output format (strict): {{ "Knowledge Check": "<one-sentence reasoning>", "Knowledge Check Final": "<correct / incorrect / unsure>", }} **Inputs:** 1. Question: {Q} 2. Proposed answer: {A_i} **Outputs:** 

Next, we prompt the model to generate whether description D entails the answer and why: 

**Task:** You are given a question about an artwork, a proposed answer, and an introduction. Provide assessment of the proposed answer: does the introduction explicitly support or contradict the proposed answer? 

17 - If the introduction clearly confirms the proposed answer, conclude correct. - If it clearly contradicts the proposed answer, conclude incorrect. - If it does not explicitly confirm or contradict the proposed answer, conclude unsure. - Always mention the proposed answer directly in the reasoning, stating whether the introduction supports, contradicts, or fails to address it. Return your answer as a single JSON string only, do not include ``` json or any extra text. Output format (strict): {{ "Information Check": "<one-sentence reasoning>", "Information Check Final": "<correct / incorrect / unsure>" }} **Inputs:** 1. Question: {Q} 2. Introduction: {D} 3. Proposed answer: {A_i} **Outputs:** 

We can then obtain the reasoning RL from “Knowledge Check”, and RD from “Information Check”. Finally, we prompt the model for answer entailment: 

**Task:** Imagine you are an {L}, also consider yourself culturally {L} and are {FAMILIARITY}. Your job is to decide whether the proposed answer is 'Correct ' or 'Incorrect ' based on both the artwork and its introduction. - First, make your judgment by looking only at the artwork (without reading the introduction). - If you cannot confidently decide based on the artwork alone, then refer to the introduction for further evaluation. Others will read your evaluation, so ensure it reflects the perspective of the persona described above. **Inputs:** 1. Question: {Q} 2. Introduction to the artwork: {D} 3. Proposed answer: {A_i} **Assessments:** 1. Artwork-only judgment from your perspective: {R_L} 2. Judgment from the introduction: {R_D} Therefore, the answer is: 

For all of the above prompts we use a Chinese translated version if L is the Chinese cultural group. 

Simulated Listener Entailment Task using Chain-of-thought without Description (Eq 3). 

**Task:** Imagine you are an {L}, also consider yourself culturally {L} and are {FAMILIARITY}. Your job is to decide whether the proposed answer is 'Correct ' or 'Incorrect '.Others will read your evaluation, so ensure it reflects the perspective of the persona described above. **Inputs:** 1. Question: {Q} 2. Proposed answer: {A_i} **Assessments:** {R_L} Therefore, the answer is: 

We use a Chinese translated prompt version if L is the Chinese cultural group. 18 Simulated Listener Answer entailment for Pragmatic Speaker (Eq 4). We use the follow-ing prompt for generate the answer using a visual-language model as simulated listener: 

**Task:** Imagine you are an {L}, also consider yourself culturally {L}. Your job is to decide whether the proposed answer is ’Correct’ or ’Incorrect’ based on both the artwork and its introduction. Others will read your evaluation, so ensure it reflects the perspective of the persona described above. **Inputs:** 1. Question: {Q}

2. Introduction to the artwork: {D}

3. Proposed answer: { ˆA}

**Assessments:** The answer is (exactly one word: Correct or Incorrect; no additional text): 

where the L is a specified cultural group of the simulated listener, the Q is a question related to the artwork, D is a model-generated description, and ˆA is the ground-truth answer for Q.We use a Chinese translated prompt version if L is the Chinese cultural group. 

Culture Symbol Generation (§3.1). We use the following prompt for obtaining culture symbols using GPT-5.1: 

**Task:** Given an artwork and a target culture, analyze the visible elements and classify them into two categories: 1. Symbols: Visual elements in the artwork that are widely recognized symbols within 

{school } culture. 2. Non-symbols: Visual elements in this artwork that are not cultural symbols within 

{school } culture. **Instructions:** - Use concise, specific names for elements. - Remove duplicates and merge close variants. - For each symbolic element, provide a short, plain-language meaning. - If no symbolic elements are present, return an empty object for "symbols". - The "non-symbols" field must always contain at least one element. - Do not include explanations, commentary, or formatting outside the JSON. 

where the school in the prompt is the cultural group of the corresponding artist. 

Artwork Background Information Generation (§3.1). We use the following prompt for generating background information using GPT-5.1: 

**Task:** You will be given an art comment and a list of cultural symbols related to this artwork. Based on this, generate a comprehensive cultural and historical background for the artwork. Your response should: - Include information about key figures, significant events, locations depicted. - Explain the meaning of each provided cultural symbol within the context of {school }

culture. Do not discuss any symbols that are not included in the provided cultural symbols list. - Write a self-contained background without referencing the original comment or the list cultural symbols directly. **Art Comment:** 

{C}

**Cultural Symbols:** 

{S}

19 **Background:** 

where the school in the prompt is the cultural group of the corresponding artist, C is the art comment provided in the dataset, and S is the culture symbols obtained from the visual artwork. 

Question Answering Evaluation Dataset Generation (§3.1). We use the following prompt for generate the culturally-attuned question answering dataset Deval using GPT-5.1: 

**TASK:** You will receive background information and a list of cultural symbols related to this artwork. Based on this information, create challenging, fact-based multiple-choice questions that focus on the cultural symbols in the artwork. Follow these guidelines: 1. Question: - Create one question per cultural symbol in the provided list. - Each question should require understanding of both the artwork and the provided background information. - The questions must be self-contained, without referencing terms like "background information". - The questions should be independent of each other. If no cultural symbols are provided, return an empty list. 2. Answer choices: - Provide 1 correct answer and 5 plausible but incorrect answers. - All the answers should be similar in length, but clearly distinct in meaning. - Avoid answers that are too vague, overly specific, opinion-based, or misleading. 3. Language: - Keep the language clear and the vocabulary simple. Return your output as a list of JSON objects in the following strict format, do not include ``` json or any extra text: [{{ "subject": "the symbolic element in the artwork", "question": "question text", "answer": "the correct answer", "type": "symbolism", "plausible_answers": [ "plausible answer 1", "plausible answer 2", "plausible answer 3", "plausible answer 4", "plausible answer 5" ]}}, ]Example: **Background:** This Japanese woodblock print, likely from the Edo period (1603--1868), depicts a tranquil winter landscape where travelers make their way through snow-covered countryside. The Edo era was a time of significant cultural growth in Japan, marked by the rise of the merchant class and the widespread popularity of \textit{ukiyo-e}, an art genre that portrayed scenes of daily life, nature, and travel. In the print, the figures wear traditional clothing such as straw hats and winter robes, while a horse carrying goods suggests a commercial trip or pilgrimage, both common during that time. Horses in Japanese folklore often symbolize travel, endurance, and at times divine guidance. The subdued tones of black and gray, paired with selective touches of color on the horse, travelers, signs, and seals, create a contemplative atmosphere and draw attention to important narrative elements. Snow in Japanese art frequently represents purity and calm, reflecting both Shinto and Buddhist aesthetics. The red seals and \textit{kanji} inscriptions serve artistic and documentary functions, indicating authenticity and possibly identifying the artist or location. Overall, the print embodies the Edo period 'sappreciation for nature, seasonal transitions, and the quiet dignity of everyday life. **Cultural Symbols:** 

20 horse, snow **Output:** [{{ "subject": "Horse", "question": "In the Edo-period winter scene, what does the horse most strongly symbolize?", "answer": "Travel and endurance, and sometimes divine guidance", "type": "symbolism", "plausible_answers": [ "Wealth and prosperity in rural communities", "Strength and dominance in feudal society", "Agricultural abundance during winter months", "Protection against harsh seasonal conditions", "Status and power of the merchant class" ]}}, {{ "subject": "Snow", "question": "In Japanese art, what does snow typically represent in a scene like this?", "answer": "Purity and tranquility, reflecting Shinto and Buddhist aesthetics.", "type": "symbolism", "plausible_answers": [ "Isolation and hardship as common themes in winter travel", "Impermanence and beauty as central ideas in seasonal change", "Economic decline and scarcity as effects of cold weather", "Celebration and joy as part of traditional winter festivals", "Divine punishment and suffering as warnings in folklore" ]}} ]**Background:** {B} **Cultural Symbols:** {S} **Output:** 

where the B is the background information of the artwork, and S are the culture symbols embedded in the artwork. 

Culturally-agnostic Question Answering Dataset Generation (§3.1). We use the following prompt for generate the culturally-agnostic question answering dataset Dagnostic using GPT-5.1: 

TASK: Based on the artwork, generate two easy fact-based multiple-choice questions that meet the following criteria: - Each question must be answerable solely by observing the artwork, without requiring any external context such as cultural or historical background. - Base each question on important content from the artwork; avoid trivial content. - Each question should be independent|avoid overlapping content between the two. - Each question should have one correct answer and five plausible but incorrect answer choices. - All the answer choices should be similar in length but clearly distinct in meaning. - Avoid answers that are too vague, overly specific, opinion-based, or misleading. - Keep the language clear and the vocabulary simple. Return your output as a list of JSON objects in the following strict format: [{"question": "question text", "answer": "a short sentence as the answer", "type": "easy", "plausible_answers": [ 

21 "plausible answer 1", "plausible answer 2", "plausible answer 3", "plausible answer 4", "plausible answer 5" ]}, ]**Example Output:** [{"question": "What type of weather is shown in the artwork?", "answer": "Snow is falling and the ground is covered in snow", "type": "easy", "plausible_answers": [ "Rain is falling and the ground is wet", "The sun is shining and the sky is clear", "Strong winds are blowing through the trees", "Fog is covering the landscape and houses", "Lightning is striking near the mountain" ]}, {"question": "What are the people in the artwork doing?", "answer": "Walking along a snowy path with a horse carrying goods", "type": "easy", "plausible_answers": [ "Fishing in a river near the snowy trees", "Dancing in a field covered with snow", "Building a house beside the snowy road", "Sitting under a tree and reading a book", "Climbing a mountain with heavy backpacks" ]}]**Output:** 

Culture-specific Item Identification (§5.2). We use the following prompt for detecting any culture-specific terms in both base and pragmatic descriptions using GPT-4o: 

**Task:** From the Chinese artwork description below, identify words that are only culturally specific to Chinese whose translation into Chinese would help non-Chinese audiences better understand the artwork. **Description:* {description }

**List of culturally specific word:* 

A.2 Human Users Performance in Question-answering 

As shown in Table 3, when no artwork descriptions are provided, users achieve lower QA accuracy on artworks from unfamiliar cultures compared to artworks from cultures with which they are familiar. This finding is consistent with the external simulated evaluation reported in Table 1. We additionally find that descriptions improve user QA accuracy for culturally unfamiliar artworks. However, unlike the simulated evaluation, the performance differences between models are not significant. Figure 4 presents qualitative examples highlighting cases where the external simulated listener’s interpretation of a description either aligns with or diverges from that of a human listener. It demonstrates difference between simulated and human understanding when descriptions are provided. 22 QA Accuracy Familiar Unfamiliar Speaker W.o. Description W. Description W.o. Description W. Description         

> Base Gemma 35.9 (24.0–47.7) 39.9 (27.7–52.1) 29.8 (18.1–41.6) 36.4 (23.4–49.4) Pragmatic Gemma 47.6 (37.3–57.9) 47.0 (35.5–58.5) 34.5 (24.1–45.0) 40.0 (28.6–51.4)

Table 3: Human user QA accuracy, ranges are 95% confidence intervals. Takeaway: Users perform better on culturally familiar artworks than on unfamiliar ones, consistent with simulated evaluation. Descriptions help understanding of culturally unfamiliar artworks, while differences between models are not significant. 

A.3 Human Evaluation Details 

Screenshots of the human evaluation survey, ordered to match the presentation flow shown to participants, are provided in Figure 5. 

Cultural-Specific Term Translation. To aid participants’ understanding of culture-specific content in Chinese artworks, we provide English-to-Chinese translations for culture-specific terms identified in the descriptions using GPT-4o (avg. 7.42 terms for base descriptions, 7.76 for pragmatic descriptions). Each identified term is translated via Wikidata by querying the term, taking the top-1 match, and retrieving its Chinese label. 

Sentence Mapping. To help participants quickly identify differences between the two descriptions, we use SimCSE (Gao et al., 2021) sentence embeddings to compute pairwise cosine similarity across sentences from both descriptions, highlighting sentence pairs with the highest similarity score above 0.8 as semantically similar. 23 Figure 5: Screenshot of the human evaluation pipeline. Each participant first reads the task instructions and important notes. 24 Figure 5: Participants select culture symbols from a list of visual elements, without any descriptions. 25 Figure 5: Participants answer three questions about each symbol, without being provided any artwork description. 26 Figure 5: Participants are then shown a randomly sampled artwork description, either from the base or the pragmatic speaker model, and asked to complete the same tasks. 27 Figure 5: Participants make subjective judgments given two descriptions generated by the base and pragmatic models. 28