Title: Exploring Concreteness Through a Figurative Lens

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.18296v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 02:35:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Exploring Concreteness Through a Figurative Lens 

Saptarshi Ghosh and Tianyu Jiang 

University of Cincinnati 

ghosh2si@mail.uc.edu, tianyu.jiang@uc.edu 

Abstract 

Static concreteness ratings are widely used in NLP, yet a word’s concreteness can shift with context, especially in figurative language such as metaphor, where common concrete nouns can take abstract interpretations. While such shifts are evident from context, it remains un-clear how LLMs understand concreteness inter-nally. We conduct a layer-wise and geometric analysis of LLM hidden representations across four model families, examining how models distinguish literal vs. figurative uses of the same noun and how concreteness is organized in representation space. We find that LLMs separate literal and figurative usage in early layers, and that mid-to-late layers compress concreteness into a one-dimensional direction that is consistent across models. Finally, we show this geometric structure is practically use-ful: a single concreteness direction supports efficient figurative-language classification and enables training-free steering of generation to-ward more literal or more figurative rewrites. 

1 Introduction 

Concreteness has been widely studied in psychol-ogy, linguistics, and natural language processing (NLP). The degree of concreteness reflects the ex-tent to which a word denotes a perceptible physical entity. Highly concrete words denote objects that can be directly experienced through the senses (e.g., 

apple , chair , wood ). In contrast, words referring to intangible or abstract notions are considered less concrete (e.g., justice , idea , freedom ). In linguis-tic studies, the concreteness of a lexical item is closely tied to whether its interpretation is literal or figurative (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980). While figurativity and concreteness are not equivalent, fig-urative expressions often involve applying a typi-cally concrete word in a non-physical or non-literal sense. Consider the words denoted in bold in the following sentences: 

(a) There is a small window of opportunity. (b) The diary opened a door into his past. (c) The church joined the movement. 

Although window , door , and church each denote tangible entities in their canonical literal uses, the above sentences illustrate idiomatic (a), metaphori-cal (b), and metonymic (c) usage respectively. The intended objects are not directly tied to their phys-ical meanings and refer to something else in the 

figurative context . Recent work highlighted this connection between concreteness and figurativity, showing that figurative usage is often associated with shifts in a word’s concreteness (Chakrabarty et al., 2021; Stowe et al., 2021). Thus, the same lex-ical item can shift along the concreteness spectrum depending on its contextual interpretation. In existing NLP work, concreteness is typically treated as a lexical semantic property, most no-tably through large-scale human annotations such as Brysbaert et al. (2014), which provides static concreteness ratings for words in isolation and have become a foundational reference across the field. Subsequent studies leverage these norms to predict concreteness from word-level embeddings (Char-bonnier and Wartena, 2019; Tater et al., 2022; Wartena, 2024), consistently showing that contex-tualized embeddings reflect concreteness shifts be-tween literal and figurative usage. However, these studies primarily focus on pre-diction performance or embedding quality, and do not explicitly examine the internal computation and explainability of contextual concreteness in LLMs. Hence, we still lack a clear understanding of where and how concreteness is processed inside modern LLMs, particularly in relation to figurative text. Mainly, the following questions remain underex-plored: (i) Which layers of an LLM encode and contextualize concreteness? (ii) Is the concreteness distinction represented along a dedicated geomet-ric subspace in the model’s embedding space? and 

> arXiv:2604.18296v1 [cs.CL] 20 Apr 2026

(iii) Can this geometric subspace of concreteness be used for steering? 

Addressing these questions, our work presents a systematic investigation by analyzing the internal representation of concreteness in terms of figurative text across layers and model architectures. First, we use a prompt-based method to generate a to-ken carrying information about the contextual con-creteness of a term. Using this, we find layer-wise correlation between the token embedding and con-creteness scores from Brysbaert et al. (2014). Our results show that concreteness is encoded in the early layers. We also use a synthetic dataset where a term is used in a pair of high and low concrete sense and show that the early layers distinguish the high and low-concrete usage of the word. Second, we analyze the internal geometric representation of concreteness across layers. We compute DiffMean vectors (Marks and Tegmark, 2024) of high and low concrete terms and create a global concrete-ness axis using SVD, which we then use to classify sentences. We identify that later layers compress concreteness into a one-directional subspace. We exploit this geometry to classify and generate figu-rative text by showing that the one-directional sub-space representation derived from the concreteness axis rivals a full dimensional supervised classifier in figurative language detection. Third, we use this geometry to steer hidden states and show that the concreteness axis can causally shift the figurative expression of the generated output without param-eter updates. We conduct large-scale experiments using 25,000 sentences extracted from Wikipedia and evaluate four major model families—Llama-3.1-8B (Grattafiori et al., 2024), Qwen3-8B (Yang et al., 2025), Gemma2-9B (Gemma Team et al., 2024), and GPT-OSS-20B (OpenAI et al., 2025), ensuring the generalization of our findings. Our code is publicly available. 1 In summary, our find-ings are: 1. Layer-wise representation of concreteness. 

We find that early layers of an LLM encode concreteness of a term and distinguish be-tween its high and low concrete use. 2. Geometric subspace of concreteness. We show that concreteness is compressed into a largely one-directional subspace in later lay-ers , revealing a shared geometric organization across LLMs. 

> 1https://github.com/cincynlp/ concreteness-interpretability

3. Geometry-guided figurative language con-trol. We demonstrate that a one-directional concreteness axis supports both lightweight figurative classification and causal steering of generation, enabling representation-driven control over figurative expression. 

2 Related Work 

Concreteness has long been a focus in psycholin-guistics (Pollock, 2018). Early studies showed that the concreteness of a word’s meaning in context emerges and changes depending on associative rich-ness and imageability (Schwanenflugel and Shoben, 1983; Barsalou, 1999). Psycholinguistic research shows concrete words are processed faster and more accurately than abstract words in a variety of tasks, a phenomenon known as the concrete-ness effect (Jessen et al., 2000; West and Holcomb, 2000; Montefinese et al., 2025). Human-generated resources confirm that concreteness forms a con-tinuous semantic dimension rather than a binary category (Brysbaert et al., 2014). In English, the most widely used resource is the Brysbaert et al. (2014) dataset of 40,000 words, where each word is rated on a scale of 1-5 rated by over 4,000 hu-man annotators, making this dataset the standard for word-level concreteness. Similar concreteness norms have been extended to other languages, al-beit in more limited scope, such as French (Bonin et al., 2018), Spanish (Guasch et al., 2016), and Italian (Montefinese et al., 2023; Puccetti et al., 2024). Muraki et al. (2023) collected concreteness judgments for 62k English multiword expressions. While static concreteness norms are invaluable, they have inherent limitations (Troche et al., 2017), because many words can be concrete or abstract depending on usage (Frassinelli et al., 2017). Gen-erally concreteness of words in isolation highly correlates with that of words in context (Monte-finese et al., 2023). But in figurative language, the concreteness of a word significantly alters from its static concreteness (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980; Holyoak and Stamenkovi´ c, 2018; Lai et al., 2019; Mon et al., 2021). Several works have previously leveraged this property of concreteness to iden-tify figurative language such as metaphors and id-ioms (Tsvetkov et al., 2013, 2014; Beigman Kle-banov et al., 2015; Maudslay et al., 2020). Con-creteness has also been extended to multimodal settings, where studies show that it plays a crucial role in shaping how concepts are in figurative de-pictions such as metaphor (Hessel et al., 2018; Su et al., 2021) and metonymy (Ghosh et al., 2026). With the advent of powerful LLMs, researchers have studied language models behavior with re-spect to concreteness. Prior work has shown that contextual concreteness can be predicted using machine learning techniques (Tater et al., 2022). Wartena (2024) showed that dynamic concrete-ness estimated from BERT-based contextual em-beddings had a very high correlation with human judgment, although the study was limited to en-coder only models (Devlin et al., 2019; Zhuang et al., 2021). The recent work of Kewenig et al. (2025) exemplifies this trend, showing that textual context, visual features and emotional cues to au-tomatically generate concreteness ratings. Inter-pretability studies have shown that concreteness can be identified as a direction in the word em-bedding space (Wartena, 2022). Recent studies demonstrate that the human-to-model alignment is substantially driven by concreteness (Iaia et al., 2025). In spite of these advancements, there exists a lack of explainability as to how current LLMs understand concreteness. We do not exactly know which layers, or the subspace geometry that is re-sponsible for distinguishing if a term is used in a high or low concrete sense in the given context. Our study fills this gap by providing insight into model behavior across different LLMs. 

3 Layer-wise Concreteness Representation 

In this section, we discuss the datasets and method-ology. We then show which layers of the LLM are responsible for encoding concreteness and differen-tiating high concrete (literal) usage of a word from its low concrete (figurative) sense. 

3.1 Datasets Wikipedia Extraction. In this work, we restrict our analysis to nouns for three reasons: (i) nouns are the primary carriers of referential meaning in figurative text, and concreteness is traditionally de-fined over nouns; (ii) nouns frequently exhibit sys-tematic sense shifts between concrete and abstract usage ( root, window, door ), making them ideal for studying figurative contextual variation; (iii) nouns in Brysbaert et al. (2014) span a diverse range of concreteness values, enabling controlled evaluation across literal and figurative contexts. The statis-tics from the Brysbaert et al. (2014) concreteness 

POS Mean SD Count 

Noun 3.52 1.01 19,056 Verb 2.92 0.76 5,369 Adjective 2.49 0.51 6,112 

> Table 1: Statistics of the different parts-of-speech iden-tified from Brysbaert et al. (2014), showing mean con-creteness score (Mean), standard deviation (SD), and number of samples (Count).

dataset further support our decision to focus on nouns. As shown in Table 1, nouns exhibit higher variability in concreteness compared to adjectives and verbs. This suggests that nouns span a broader range from concrete to abstract meanings, while verbs and adjectives are more concentrated. In total, we identify 19,056 nouns in the database using spaCy. We then extract 25,000 sentences from Wikipedia dumps containing these target nouns. 2 Extraction proceeds in two stages. First, we collect an initial pool of 50,000 sentences, en-forcing a cap of 20 occurrences per noun to main-tain lexical diversity. Then, we downsample this pool to 25,000 sentences while preserving a broad distribution of concreteness values across nouns. This ensures that the resulting dataset is both lex-ically diverse and semantically balanced, provid-ing robust supervision for contextual concreteness probing. 

Synthetic Dataset Creation. To enable fine-grained and controlled evaluation, we construct a synthetic contrastive dataset using GPT-5.1. We first sample 600 highly concrete nouns (concrete-ness score > 4.5) from Brysbaert et al. (2014). For each noun, GPT-5.1 is prompted to generate two different sentences: (i) one where the noun is used in its normal high concrete (literal) sense, and (ii) one where it is used in a low concrete (figurative) sense. This results in 600 sentence pairs, 1,200 sen-tences total. To verify the generated sentences, two human annotators independently judged whether each sentence used the target noun at the expected level of concreteness. The annotators validated 600 literal sentences and 572 figurative sentences as correct. This portrayed GPT-5.1’s strong ability in understanding concreteness and generation. The inter-annotator raw agreement is 93.7%. Full de-tails about the prompts and annotation are given in Appendix H. We randomly sampled 500 pairs from 572, making the synthetic dataset. Table 2 provides                     

> 2https://huggingface.co/datasets/wikimedia/wikipedia High Concreteness Low Concreteness
> The roof was damaged during the storm and needed repairs The new policy put a roof on employee salaries to prevent over-payment.
> The rusty chain bound the old gate shut. The chain of events led to the company’s downfall.
> He climbed the ladder to reach the top shelf. She’s been climbing the corporate ladder for years.
> The window on the second floor was broken. The company’s new product launch provided a brief window
> into their future plans.

Table 2: Example of synthetic GPT-5.1 generated sentences. 

representative examples from this synthetic corpus. The motivation for using this synthetic dataset is that we want to analyze how LLMs uncover con-textual concreteness in figurative usage. 

3.2 Concreteness Token 

The findings of Montefinese et al. (2023) and Wartena (2024) showed that concreteness of words in isolation highly correlates with that of words in context. However, it is well established that in figurative text, the concreteness of a term highly deviate from its static norm (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980). Previous concreteness probing methods typ-ically extract embeddings of the target word in context (Wartena, 2024). However, in decoder-only LLMs, such embeddings are limited by left-to-right processing and may not fully reflect contextual or figurative interpretations (e.g., “ The chain of events led to his downfall ”). As a result, we use a prompt-based approach. 

Methodology. To recover contextual semantics, we provide the model with the sentence containing the target noun, asking for its concreteness:                

> Sentence: [sentence] On ascale of 1to 5(5 being the highest), in the context of the sentence, what is the concreteness of the word “[target_word]”?

We adopt two complementary approaches using this prompt: (i) allowing the model to generate an explicit numerical estimate (Gen), and (ii) extract-ing the hidden states of the last token representation and train a regression model to predict the concrete-ness score (Tok). For comparison, we also predict concreteness scores without the context by remov-ing the sentence and providing just the target word to the model. The prompt reads “ On a scale of 1 to 5 (5 being the highest), what is the concreteness of the word [target_word]. ” In both cases, we com-pute and report the Pearson correlation between the predicted score and human-rated concreteness values from Brysbaert et al. (2014). 

With Context W/o Context Model Gen Tok Gen Tok 

Llama-3.1-8B 0.66 0.88 0.70 0.98 

Qwen3-8B 0.60 0.87 0.65 0.98 

Gemma2-9B 0.64 0.92 0.68 0.98 

GPT-OSS-20B 0.58 0.82 0.63 0.98 

Table 3: Pearson correlation between the human con-creteness ratings and model predictions using two meth-ods: Gen—numeric rating generated by the model; Tok—score derived from last token hidden states. 

The hidden representations of the last token en-code the contextual interpretation of the noun, en-abling concreteness probing in generative archi-tectures where direct noun embeddings are insuffi-cient. We extract the hidden states of the last token across all layers. We train a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) regression model using an 80-20 train-test split and predict the concreteness score of the tar-get noun (More details regarding MLP settings in Appendix G). This setup enables us to study how concreteness is encoded across layers, and how it differs with and without context. Since human con-creteness ratings are defined over individual words without context, we expect the without context set-ting to have a higher correlation. 

Results. Table 3 reports the Pearson correla-tion between human-rated concreteness scores and model predictions obtained from the two meth-ods, with and without the sentence. When directly prompted to output a concreteness rating, the mod-els achieve reasonable correlation with human judg-ments, while predictions derived from the hidden states of the last token representation show con-sistently higher correlation, demonstrating that the last-token representation encodes substantial infor-mation about the concreteness of the target noun. Figure 1 presents the layer-wise (normalized across models) correlation between token represen-tations and human concreteness ratings across all 0.0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0 

> Normalized Layer Depth
> 0.80
> 0.85
> 0.90
> 0.95
> 1.00
> Pearson Correlation
> Llama-3.1-8B
> Qwen3-8B
> GPT-OSS-20B
> Gemma2-9B
> With Context
> Without Context

Figure 1: Layer-wise Pearson correlation between static human concreteness ratings and model predictions using the last token representation, with and without sentence context, across four LLMs. Contextual input yields an early peak followed by a later decline, indicating increasing deviation from static norms as deeper layers incorporate contextual interpretation. 

models. As we expected, the correlation score for the without context setting is higher than contextual setting. In both settings, correlation is already high in the earliest layers, suggesting that concreteness is encoded in the very initial layers . In without context settings, where the target noun is presented in isolation, this high correlation persists across layers. In contrast, when sentence context is pro-vided, the correlation exhibits a distinct pattern: it peaks in the early layers and gradually decreases in later layers. This pattern suggests that early layers capture lexical concreteness, while later layers in-creasingly incorporate sentence-level context such as figurative interpretations. 

3.3 Layers Discriminating Literal & Figurative Usage 

A shift in a term’s concreteness is often brought by the figurative use of that term (Stowe et al., 2021). If concreteness is encoded in the early layers, does that also mean these layers are responsible for dis-tinguishing literal (high-concrete) and figurative (low-concrete) usage of a term? Here, we answer this question with a controlled experiment on the synthetic dataset which contains high and low con-crete usage of the same noun. Using the 25,000 Wikipedia-sentence corpus, we first extract the hidden states of the last token rep-resentation using our prompt, and train an MLP (same settings as the previous experiment) to pre-dict concreteness for each layer-l. We then evalu-ate the trained regression model on the synthetic dataset , which contains pairs where the same noun appears in either a literal (highly concrete) usage 1 6 11 16 21 26 31 

> Layer
> 1.5
> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> Mean  (Predicted  Static)
> Literal usage (high-concrete)
> Figurative usage (low-concrete)

Figure 2: Mean δ across layers in Llama-3.1-8B, where 

δ = Cpred − Cstatic . Positive values indicate higher pre-dicted concreteness than the static norm (literal usage), while negative values indicate lower predicted concrete-ness (figurative usage). The early and consistent separa-tion between high and low concrete curves shows that contextual shifts in concreteness are captured from early layers onward. 

(e.g., “the window was broken”) or figurative (less concrete) usage (e.g., “the window of opportunity has passed”). For each layer l, we compute the difference be-tween the predicted contextual concreteness score 

C(l) 

> pred

and the static human score Cstatic from Brys-baert et al. (2014), and report the mean difference: 

δ(l) 

> mean

= 1

n

> n

X

> i=1



C(l) 

> pred ,i

− Cstatic ,i 



,

where n denotes the number of sentences (500 for each literal and figurative). The magnitude of δ(l)

> mean

(i.e., |δ(l)

> mean

|) reflects how far the predicted con-textual concreteness deviates from the static score. The sign indicates the direction of the shift (higher vs. lower than the static norm). We present both 

δhigh (l) 

> mean

(literal high-concrete usage, red line) and 

δlow (l) 

> mean

(figurative low-concrete usage, blue line) for every layer to visualize how their separation evolves across the layers. 

Results. Figure 2 shows the results for Llama-3.1-8B; results for the remaining models are reported in Appendix D. Across all models, we observe a consistent pattern in which early layers already differentiate literal high-concrete from figurative low-concrete noun usage, with δhigh (l) 

> mean

and δlow (l)

> mean

separating from as early as layer 2 and remaining distinct through the final layer. Importantly, the direction of the shift is system-atic: literal high-concrete usages yield positive 

δhigh (l) 

> mean

, while figurative low-concrete usages yield negative δlow (l) 

> mean

, indicating that the model adjusts concreteness estimates in the appropriate direction based on context. Appendix A shows the same experiment on verbs yields a lower separation. 

Takeaway. LLMs encode concreteness and differ-entiate literal (high-concrete) and figurative (low-concrete) usage of a noun in the early layers .

4 Concreteness Geometric Subspace 

In this section, we examine how LLMs internally represent concreteness. We create a global con-creteness axis and use it to classify figurative text. 

4.1 Creating Global Subspace 

We now want to characterize the geometric struc-ture of concreteness representations by deriving a global subspace. For this, we first construct 

difference-in-means (DiffMean) vector (Marks and Tegmark, 2024) that captures the dominant direc-tion along which concreteness varies in the model’s hidden space. DiffMean is a lightweight linear method that identifies directions associated with behavioral distinctions, offering mathematical sim-plicity along with direct interpretability and strong empirical performance (Vennemeyer et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2026). 

Constructing DiffMean. We use the 25,000 Wikipedia sentences to create the DiffMean vec-tor. Since DiffMean is the difference between the samples from positive and negative classes, we set two thresholds to gather high and low concrete sentences. Using static concreteness ratings (1–5) from Brysbaert et al. (2014), we classify nouns with scores ≥ 4 as high-concrete ( Dhigh ) and scores ≤ 2

as low-concrete ( Dlow ). This yields a balanced sam-ple of 2,256 high-concrete and 2,116 low-concrete sentence instances. Following our prompt-based probing setup, we extract the hidden representation of the last token that encodes concreteness infor-mation at every transformer layer l for both high and low concrete sets. For layer l, we compute the mean representation of the last token for the high-and low-concrete groups: 

μ(l) 

> high

= Ei∼D high 

h

h(l)

> i

i

, μ(l) 

> low

= Ei∼D low 

h

h(l)

> i

i

,

where h(l) 

> i

denotes the layer-l hidden representa-tion of the last token for sentence instance i. We define the DiffMean at layer l as: 

w(l) = μ(l) 

> high

− μ(l)

> low

.

Global Concreteness Subspace via SVD. We seek to identify a compact set of linear directions that dif-ferentiate high and low concrete noun usage across the model’s layers. To do this, we first stack all the DiffMean vectors from all the layers, creating a global matrix W . We then perform singular value decomposition (SVD) on this matrix. This yields a set of orthogonal directions in the hidden state space ( V ⊤), ranked by how strongly they separate high and low concrete usages. We select the top-k

right singular vectors to form a global basis: 

Bk = V ⊤

> 1: k

,

where Bk contains the k strongest directions along which high and low concrete usages differ. Bk

defines a layer-independent subspace capturing the dominant geometry of concreteness. By selecting 

k in a single direction (k = 1) , we test whether concreteness is encoded in a highly compressed, unidirectional space across layers of the LLM. 

4.2 Layer-wise Projection & Results 

To evaluate the effectiveness of this global sub-space, we use our prompt-based probing technique on the synthetic dataset and obtain, for each sen-tence, the hidden state h(l) at layer l that carries con-textual concreteness information. We then project these embeddings into the global subspace: 

s(h(l)) = Bkh(l),

where Bk is the global concreteness subspace and 

s(h(l)) are the k-dimensional projection scores. We then take the average of this scalar score across all dimensions in the model. Using these scores for high and low concrete sentences as positive and negative examples, we compute the area un-der the ROC curve (AUROC) at each layer, which quantifies how well the global subspace separates concrete usages across model depth. 

Results. Figure 3 reports AUROC scores for a uni-directional concreteness subspace ( k = 1 ) across all models with normalized layer depth. Individual model graphs and different k values are provided in Appendix E. The results show that all models com-press concreteness into a single global direction in the later layers. The compression begins primarily in the middle layers. GPT-OSS-20B shows slightly different behavior as the compression begins in the early layers—we attribute this deviation due to its mixture-of-expert architecture (Lo et al., 2025). For all models, AUROC score reach around 0.90 0.0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0 

> Normalized Layer Depth
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> AUROC Score
> Llama-3.1-8B
> Qwen3-8B
> GPT-OSS-20B
> Gemma2-9B

Figure 3: Layer-wise AUROC for separating high and low concrete noun usages using a global unidirectional concreteness axis across four LLMs, showing increasing separability and compression in middle and later layers. 

from the middle layers through to the final layer, indicating that a unidirectional linear subspace is sufficient to distinguish concrete from abstract us-age at those stages. 

4.3 Figurative Text Classification 

Prior work on figurative text classification typi-cally relies on training neural networks using the contextualized embeddings. Motivated by our find-ing that concreteness is encoded in a compressed one-directional subspace in the LLMs, we explore classifying figurative text using only this unidirec-tional concreteness axis without training , and suc-cessfully achieve comparable performance to full-dimensional supervised training. 

Datasets. We use three forms of figurative text and two datasets from each: i) Idioms - EPIE (Sax-ena and Paul, 2020) and MAGPIE (Haagsma et al., 2020), ii) Metaphor - VUA (Steen et al., 2010) and MUNCH (Tong et al., 2024), iii) Metonymy - Con-MeC (Ghosh and Jiang, 2025) and MetFuse (Ghosh and Jiang, 2026). We select samples where the fig-urative expression is conveyed through the noun. The data preparing, preprocessing and distribution is provided in Appendix F. 

Methodology. Similar to the previous experiment, we use the 25,000 Wikipedia sentences to construct the DiffMean vector and get the one-directional concreteness subspace ( k = 1 ) using SVD. We then evaluate this geometric subspace on differ-ent figurative text classification datasets. For each dataset, we select the hidden representation of the target noun from a layer where our analysis showed strong single directional separability (layer 20 for Llama-3.1-8B). We then project the representation onto the learned unidirectional axis to obtain a sin-

AUROC Score Task Dataset Subspace (Zero-shot) Full Rep. (Trained) 

Idioms MAGPIE 95.2 98.5 EPIE 95.3 99.2 Metaphor VUA 95.7 97.6 MUNCH 93.2 95.1 Metonymy ConMeC 60.2 62.6 MetFuse 85.7 96.3 

Table 4: AUROC scores for figurative text classification with Llama-3.1-8B, comparing a unidirectional con-creteness subspace learned from Wikipedia and applied to downstream datasets against a full-representation clas-sifier trained separately on each dataset. 

gle scalar projection score and compute the AU-ROC score. As a comparison, we also train a re-gression classifier with the same parameters as in Appendix G on the last layer’s full hidden state 

(4,096-dimensional for Llama-3.1-8B) using 80-20 train-test split, averaged over 5 runs. This baseline represents the performance without dimensionality constraints. This setup allows us to directly mea-sure how much discriminative signal for concrete-ness is preserved in the one-directional subspace. 

Results. Table 4 reports AUROC scores when us-ing the concreteness subspace projection score to classify, compared to a classifier trained on the full 4,096-dimensional hidden state of Llama-3.1-8B. Results for other models are provided in Ap-pendix J. All four models show consistent results. Across all figurative datasets, our subspace projec-tion consistently recovers more than 95% of the performance of the full classifier, despite it being a scalar projection on a unidirectional axis com-pared to the its original 4,096 dimensional embed-dings. The high AUROC for metaphor and idiom datasets using the concreteness axis aligns with previous linguistic studies which states that con-creteness of a term alters highly in metaphors and idioms (Lakoff, 1993; Glucksberg, 2001). In com-parison, metonymy keeps the interpretation tied to a concrete entity or situation and the concreteness of a term shifts less (Barcelona, 2003). This re-sults in lower AUROC for metonymy compared to metaphors and idioms. MetFuse gets a relatively better score compared to ConMeC as it solely fo-cuses on location metonymy, narrowing its scope. The gap between the unidirectional concreteness subspace with the fully trained classifier is more, Original Literal Sentence Unsteered Rewrite Figuratively Steered Rewrite     

> She struggled to push the heavy door open. She struggled to force the heavy door open. The heavy door battled her attempts to push it open.
> The dirt path wound through the forest, the hikers followed it to a hidden waterfall.
> The dirt path wound through the forest, leading the hikers to a hidden waterfall.
> A winding dirt path marched the hikers through the forest to a hidden waterfall.
> The electoral results were to be announced later that day.
> The electoral results were scheduled to be announced later that day.
> Suspense engulfed the city for the electoral results later that day.
> The factory was shut down in 1972. The factory closed in 1972. The factory closed its door in 1972.

Table 5: Example of concreteness-guided steering for rewriting literal sentences with Llama-3.1-8B. The original sentence and all the unsteered rewrites are literal. The steered rewrites are figurative. 

tying to previous linguistic work regarding limited concreteness shift in metonymic interpretation of a term (Panther and Radden, 1999). These results indicate that the low-dimensional concreteness sub-space can be used for figurative text identification. 

Takeaway. LLMs compress concreteness into a unified one-directional subspace in the late layers ,and this compression emerges in the middle layers .This subspace can be used for figurative text classi-fication with significantly low latency and almost equal performance as a fully trained classifier. 

5 Concreteness Controlled Steering 

The results above establish that LLMs encode literal-figurative variation along a highly compress-ible one-directional subspace in its deeper layers. We now assess whether this latent direction is merely representational or whether it plays a causal role in generative behavior. If this semantic dimen-sion truly governs how the model interprets a noun in context, then directly manipulating hidden states along this axis should influence the figurativity of the generated text. We turn the concreteness sub-space into a controllable knob, enabling post-hoc control over how literal or figurative the model’s generations are. 

Methodology. We use the previous method to de-rive the unidirectional concreteness subspace us-ing SVD over hidden representations of 25,000 Wikipedia sentences. This learned direction is sub-sequently applied to multiple figurative language datasets, enabling us to evaluate the cross-dataset transferability of the learned concreteness represen-tation. This gives a unit direction u along which concreteness varies in the model’s latent space. We then provide a sentence to the model and use a prompt to rewrite the input: “ Rewrite the follow-ing sentence clearly and naturally: ”. As noted, the prompt does not contain any instructions about figurativeness or concreteness of the rewrite. Dur-ing decoding, we intervene on the model’s hid-den state h(ℓ) at a selected layer ℓ—chosen from layers where the one-directional subspace reliably encodes concreteness information (Figure 3). At this layer, we modify the hidden representation by adding an offset α along the concreteness axis: 

h(ℓ) 

> steer

= h(ℓ) + α · u, 

where α controls the strength and direction of the intervention. For a more literal rewrite, we steer in the direction of high concrete representations (α > 0), and for a more figurative rewrite, we steer in the opposite direction ( α < 0). The perturbed hidden state is then propagated through subsequent layers to produce the rewritten continuation. To evaluate steering effectiveness, we use the synthetic dataset. We sample 100 figurative (low concrete) sentences when steering toward literal rewrites, and 100 literal (high concrete) sentences when steering toward figurative rewrites. For each sentence, we generate both steered ( α = ±40 )and unsteered rewrites. In both cases, we use the same rewriting prompt without any hint regarding the intended expression of the rewrite. Then two independent human annotators rate whether the output exhibits the intended literal or figurative expression. We intervene at layer 20 for Llama-3.1-8B, 25 for Qwen3-8B, 27 for Gemma2-9B and 15 for GPT-OSS-20B. 

Results. Table 5 shows some qualitative exam-ples of unsteered vs steered rewrites going from literal to figurative. Table 6 shows the quantita-tive result of the steering-based rewriting experi-ment. We used human annotators to evaluate 100 sentences under both figurative and literal steer-ing conditions, as well as their unsteered counter-parts. For literal inputs, all models produce literal paraphrases in the unsteered condition. Steering towards the low-concrete direction ( α = −40 ) in-duces figurative reinterpretations for around 10% Lit → Fig Fig → Lit Model Steer Unsteer Steer Unsteer                        

> Llama-3.1-8B 12 071 42 Qwen3-8B 10 068 45 Gemma2-9B 9067 52 GPT-OSS-20B 15 075 39
> Table 6: Number of sentences judged by humans to be successfully steered in a sample of 100. Lit →Fig
> indicates original sentence was literal, the LLM rewrite is figurative. Fig →Lit is when input is figurative, rewrite is literal.

of the sentences. For figurative inputs, unsteered rewriting already produces literal paraphrases for 40–50% of the cases, reflecting a strong literal bias in LLMs (Chakrabarty et al., 2022). Our concreteness-based steering consistently improves this figure to around 70%, showing that shifting hidden states along the identified concreteness axis makes the model more likely to rewrite the figu-rative sentence in a literal sense. Table 8 in Ap-pendix I shows qualitative examples of steering from figurative to literal. The results reveal that steering from figurative to literal usage is more effective than steering from literal to figurative usage. This aligns with the ob-servation that transforming literal text to figurative is difficult due to semantic and meaning abstraction challenges (Stowe et al., 2021; Chakrabarty et al., 2021). Figurative language requires controlled con-ceptual mapping while preserving meaning, which makes generation harder than literal instances (Lai and Nissim, 2024). Nevertheless, the ability to induce even moder-ate figurative reinterpretation from literal inputs without modifying model parameters or providing a figurativity prompt suggests that the learned con-creteness direction is a causally relevant control dimension. We believe that this result opens oppor-tunities for future work on controllable figurative generation, including designing steering vectors derived from richer figurativity phenomena (e.g., metonymy vs. metaphor distinctions) and combin-ing causal steering with explicit task prompts to further enhance stylistic expressivity. 

Takeaway. The one-directional geometric axis of concreteness could be used as a causally manip-ulable handle for modifying the figurative-literal interpretation of text, enabling controlled rewriting without model retraining or task-specific prompts. 

6 Conclusion 

Our work provides a comprehensive analysis of how LLMs represent and process concreteness in-ternally. We show that the early layers encode concreteness, and differentiate high-concrete (lit-eral) and low-concrete (figurative) usage of a term. In later layers, concreteness is compressed into a shared direction in representation space, and the compression emerges from the middle layers. This structure generalizes across models and supports zero-shot figurative language classification with significantly low latency and close to a fully trained classifier. Finally, we demonstrate that manipu-lating this concreteness direction causally steers generation between literal and figurative interpreta-tions. 

Limitations 

While our work analyzes the internals of different LLMs in understanding concreteness and shows promising future research direction, certain limita-tions exist. First, our study does not use human-annotated judgments for contextual concreteness. We use a trained regression model and concrete-ness information carrying token to predict the con-creteness score. The predicted scores show very high correlation with the human annotated scores (≈0.98). However, incorporating human annota-tions would provide a stronger grounding for evalu-ating contextual variation and remains an important direction for future work. We construct a unidirectional concreteness sub-space using DiffMean vectors derived from high and low concrete noun usages. This subspace yields competitive performance for figurative lan-guage classification and enables controllable rewrit-ing between figurative and literal expressions. However, it may be possible that this subspace does not isolate concreteness in a strictly independent manner. The identified direction may also encode other correlated semantic or linguistic factors, and intervening along this axis does not guarantee that only concreteness-related properties are affected. Identifying overlapping factors in a geometric sub-space and disentangling them remains challenging. We view this as an interesting and important direc-tion and leave it for future work. While concreteness is strongly related to figura-tive language, the two are not equivalent. A reduc-tion in contextual concreteness does not uniquely imply figurative usage. For instance, word sense disambiguation phenomena can also involve shifts from highly concrete nouns to less concrete con-textual usage without invoking figurative language (root of a tree vs. square root of a number). To mitigate this confound, we explicitly identify and remove such cases when constructing our synthetic dataset, ensuring that concreteness shifts are pri-marily driven by figurative usage. Consequently, our experiments evaluate the concreteness axis in a controlled setting where concreteness-based dis-tinctions align with figurative contrasts. However, this does not imply that all figurative language can be reduced to concreteness differences, nor that concreteness alone is sufficient to fully character-ize figurative meaning. 

Ethical Considerations 

The natural language data used in our experiments originates from Wikipedia, which may contain his-torical and demographic biases; however, our study focuses exclusively on representational differences in word concreteness and does not involve any ap-plications with social impact. Synthetic evaluation examples were generated using a commercial LLM (GPT-5.1), and human annotation was limited to verifying concreteness usage rather than sensitive attributes. 

Acknowledgments 

We thank the CincyNLP group for their suggestions and feedback. We also thank the anonymous ACL reviewers for their insightful suggestions. 

References 

Antonio Barcelona. 2003. Metaphor and Metonymy at the Crossroads: A Cognitive Perspective . Mouton de Gruyter. Lawrence W Barsalou. 1999. Perceptual symbol sys-tems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 22(4):577– 660. Beata Beigman Klebanov, Chee Wee Leong, and Michael Flor. 2015. Supervised word-level metaphor detection: Experiments with concreteness and reweighting of examples. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Metaphor in NLP , pages 11–20, Denver, Colorado. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. P. Bonin, A. Méot, and A. Bugaiska. 2018. Con-creteness norms for 1,659 french words: Relation-ships with other psycholinguistic variables and word recognition times. Behavior Research Methods ,50(6):2366–2387. Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, and 1 others. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Preprint , arXiv:2005.14165. Marc Brysbaert, Amy Beth Warriner, and Victor Ku-perman. 2014. Concreteness ratings for 40 thousand generally known english word lemmas. Behavior Research Methods , 46(3):904–911. Cristina Cacciari and Patrizia Tabossi, editors. 1993. 

Idioms: Processing, Structure, and Interpretation .Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, USA. Tuhin Chakrabarty, Yejin Choi, and Vered Shwartz. 2022. It’s not rocket science: Interpreting figurative language in narratives. Transactions of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics , 10:589–606. Tuhin Chakrabarty, Xurui Zhang, Smaranda Muresan, and Nanyun Peng. 2021. MERMAID: Metaphor gen-eration with symbolism and discriminative decoding. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics (NAACL 2021) .Jean Charbonnier and Christian Wartena. 2019. Pre-dicting word concreteness and imagery. In Proceed-ings of the 13th International Conference on Com-putational Semantics - Long Papers , pages 176–187, Gothenburg, Sweden. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL 2019) .Diego Frassinelli, Daniela Naumann, Jason Utt, and Sabine Schulte m Walde. 2017. Contextual character-istics of concrete and abstract words. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computa-tional Semantics (IWCS) — Short papers .Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhupati-raju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, Johan Ferret, Peter Liu, Pouya Tafti, Abe Friesen, Michelle Casbon, Sabela Ramos, Ravin Kumar, Charline Le Lan, Sammy Jerome, and 179 others. 2024. Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size. Preprint ,arXiv:2408.00118. Saptarshi Ghosh and Tianyu Jiang. 2025. ConMeC: A dataset for metonymy resolution with common nouns. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL 2025) .Saptarshi Ghosh and Tianyu Jiang. 2026. Metfuse: Figurative fusion between metonymy and metaphor. 

Preprint , arXiv:2604.12919. Saptarshi Ghosh, Linfeng Liu, and Tianyu Jiang. 2026. A computational approach to visual metonymy. In 

Proceedings of the 19th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (EACL 2026) .Sam Glucksberg. 2001. Understanding Figurative Lan-guage: From Metaphor to Idioms . Oxford University Press, New York, NY, USA. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schel-ten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, and others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Preprint ,arXiv:2407.21783. M. Guasch, P. Ferré, and I. Fraga. 2016. Spanish norms for affective and lexico-semantic variables for 1,400 words. Behavior Research Methods , 48(4):1358– 1369. Hessel Haagsma, Johan Bos, and Malvina Nissim. 2020. MAGPIE: A large corpus of potentially idiomatic expressions. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Lan-guage Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages 279–287, Marseille, France. European Language Re-sources Association. Jack Hessel, David Mimno, and Lillian Lee. 2018. Quantifying the visual concreteness of words and topics in multimodal datasets. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL 2018) .Keith J. Holyoak and Dušan Stamenkovi´ c. 2018. Metaphor comprehension: A critical review of theories and evidence. Psychological Bulletin ,144(6):641–671. Cosimo Iaia, Bhavin Choksi, Emily Wiebers, Gemma Roig, and Christian J. Fiebach. 2025. The repre-sentational alignment between humans and language models is implicitly driven by a concreteness effect. 

Preprint , arXiv:2505.15682. F. Jessen, R. Heun, M. Erb, D.-O. Granath, U. Klose, A. Papassotiropoulos, and W. Grodd. 2000. The concreteness effect: Evidence for dual coding and context availability. Brain and Language , 74(1):103– 112. Viktor Kewenig, Jeremy I. Skipper, and Gabriella Vigliocco. 2025. A multimodal transformer-based tool for automatic generation of concreteness ratings across languages. Communications Psychology , 3. Huiyuan Lai and Malvina Nissim. 2024. A survey on automatic generation of figurative language: From rule-based systems to large language models. ACM Comput. Surv. , 56(10). Vicky T. Lai, Odessa Howerton, and Rutvik H. Desai. 2019. Concrete processing of action metaphors: Evi-dence from erp. Brain Research , 1714:202–209. George Lakoff. 1993. The contemporary theory of metaphor. In Andrew Ortony, editor, Metaphor and Thought , 2 edition, pages 202–251. Cambridge Uni-versity Press, Cambridge, UK. George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live By . University of Chicago Press, Chicago. Ka Man Lo, Zeyu Huang, Zihan Qiu, Zili Wang, and Jie Fu. 2025. A closer look into mixture-of-experts in large language models. In Findings of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 (Findings of NAACL 2025) .Samuel Marks and Max Tegmark. 2024. The geometry of truth: Emergent linear structure in large language model representations of true/false datasets. Preprint ,arXiv:2310.06824. Rowan Hall Maudslay, Tiago Pimentel, Ryan Cotterell, and Simone Teufel. 2020. Metaphor detection using context and concreteness. In Proceedings of the Sec-ond Workshop on Figurative Language Processing ,pages 221–226, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessì, Maria Lomeli, Christo-foros Nalmpantis, Ram Pasunuru, Roberta Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyilmaz, Edouard Grave, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Augmented language mod-els: a survey. Preprint , arXiv:2302.07842. Serena K. Mon, Mira Nencheva, Francesca M.M. Cit-ron, Casey Lew-Williams, and Adele E. Goldberg. 2021. Conventional metaphors elicit greater real-time engagement than literal paraphrases or con-crete sentences. Journal of Memory and Language ,121:104285. M. Montefinese, L. Gregori, A. A. Ravelli, R. Varvara, and D. P. Radicioni. 2023. Concretext norms: Con-creteness ratings for italian and english words in con-text. PLOS ONE , 18(10):e0293031. M. Montefinese, A. Visalli, A. Angrilli, and E. Am-brosini. 2025. Fine-grained concreteness effects on word processing and representation across three tasks: An erp study. Psychophysiology , 62(5):e70074. Emiko J Muraki, Summer Abdalla, Marc Brysbaert, and Penny M Pexman. 2023. Concreteness ratings for 62,000 english multiword expressions. Behavior research methods , 55(5):2522–2531. OpenAI, :, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Applebaum, Edwin Arbus, Rahul K. Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, Boaz Barak, Ally Bennett, Tyler Bertao, and others. 2025. gpt-oss-120b gpt-oss-20b model card. 

Preprint , arXiv:2508.10925. Klaus-Uwe Panther and Günter Radden, editors. 1999. 

Metonymy in Language and Thought , volume 4 of 

Human Cognitive Processing . John Benjamins Pub-lishing Company, Amsterdam / Philadelphia. Lewis Pollock. 2018. Concepts and concreteness in psycholinguistics. Giovanni Puccetti, Claudia Collacciani, Andrea Amelio Ravelli, Andrea Esuli, and Marianna Bolognesi. 2024. ABRICOT - ABstRactness and inclusiveness in COn-texT: A CALAMITA challenge. In Proceedings of the Tenth Italian Conference on Computational Lin-guistics (CLiC-it 2024) , pages 1161–1167, Pisa, Italy. CEUR Workshop Proceedings. Prateek Saxena and Soma Paul. 2020. Epie dataset: A corpus for possible idiomatic expressions. Preprint ,arXiv:2006.09479. Paula J. Schwanenflugel and Edward J. Shoben. 1983. Differential context effects in the comprehension of abstract and concrete verbal materials. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition , 9(1):82–102. Gerard J. Steen, Agnes G. Dorst, J. Berenike Herrmann, Anna A. Kaal, Thomas Krennmayr, and Trijntje Pasma. 2010. A Method for Linguistic Metaphor Identification: From MIP to MIPVU . John Ben-jamins Publishing Company, Amsterdam. Kevin Stowe, Tuhin Chakrabarty, Nanyun Peng, Smaranda Muresan, and Iryna Gurevych. 2021. Metaphor generation with conceptual mappings. In 

Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (ACL 2021) .Chang Su, Weijie Chen, Ze Fu, and Yijiang Chen. 2021. Multimodal metaphor detection based on distinguish-ing concreteness. Neurocomputing , 429:166–173. Tarun Tater, Diego Frassinelli, and Sabine Schulte im Walde. 2022. Concreteness vs. abstractness: A se-lectional preference perspective. In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 12th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing: Student Research Workshop ,pages 92–98, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xiaoyu Tong, Rochelle Choenni, Martha Lewis, and Ekaterina Shutova. 2024. Metaphor understanding challenge dataset for LLMs. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (ACL 2024) .Joshua Troche, Sebastian Crutch, and Jamie Reilly. 2017. Defining a conceptual topography of word con-creteness: Clustering properties of emotion, sensa-tion, and magnitude among 750 english words. Fron-tiers in Psychology , 8:1787. Yulia Tsvetkov, Leonid Boytsov, Anatole Gershman, Eric Nyberg, and Chris Dyer. 2014. Metaphor detec-tion with cross-lingual model transfer. In Proceed-ings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2014) .Yulia Tsvetkov, Elena Mukomel, and Anatole Gersh-man. 2013. Cross-lingual metaphor detection using common semantic features. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Metaphor in NLP , pages 45–51, Atlanta, Georgia. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Daniel Vennemeyer, Phan Anh Duong, Tiffany Zhan, and Tianyu Jiang. 2025. Sycophancy is not one thing: Causal separation of sycophantic behaviors in llms. 

Preprint , arXiv:2509.21305. Christian Wartena. 2022. On the geometry of concrete-ness. In Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Repre-sentation Learning for NLP , pages 204–212, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Christian Wartena. 2024. Estimating word concreteness from contextualized embeddings. In Proceedings of the 20th Conference on Natural Language Processing (KONVENS 2024) , pages 81–88, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. W. C. West and P. J. Holcomb. 2000. Imaginal, se-mantic, and surface-level processing of concrete and abstract words: An electrophysiological investiga-tion. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 12(6):1024– 1037. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, and oth-ers. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Louie Hong Yao, Vishesh Anand, Yuan Zhuang, and Tianyu Jiang. 2026. Rhetorical questions in llm representations: A linear probing study. Preprint ,arXiv:2604.14128. Biao Zhang, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. 2023. Prompting large language model for machine transla-tion: A case study. Preprint , arXiv:2301.07069. Liu Zhuang, Lin Wayne, Shi Ya, and Zhao Jun. 2021. A robustly optimized BERT pre-training approach with post-training. In Proceedings of the 20th Chinese National Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pages 1218–1227, Huhhot, China. Chinese Informa-tion Processing Society of China. A Verb Concreteness Discrimination 

We further extend this analysis to verbs, seeing if the low concrete usage of a verb is identified sim-ilarly. We first extract sentences from Wikipedia based on verbs from Brysbaert et al. (2014) and train a probe. We then construct a synthetic dataset of action verbs used in a literal vs figu-rative sense. For instance, “ He grasped the ball ”for high-concrete literal usage, “ He grasped the opportunity ” for low-concrete figurative usage. 1 6 11 16 21 26 31 

> Layer
> 1.0
> 0.8
> 0.6
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> Mean  (Predicted  Static)  Verb literal usage (high-concrete)
> Verb figurative usage (low-concrete)

Figure 4: Mean δ across layers in Llama-3.1-8B, for verbs. Early high separation is followed by moderate to low separation in the middle to later layers. 

Figure 4 shows the results for verbs in Llama-3.1-8B. Although the high-concrete verbs have a higher predicted score in all layers, the delta value is not as prominent as nouns. Hence the predicted concreteness scores for literal and figurative verb usages were similar across the layers. These obser-vations agree with previous linguistic work which shows that verbs undergo subtler semantic exten-sions, while nouns exhibit clearer concreteness shifts between literal and figurative usage (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980). Intuitively, from the example above ( He grasped the ball vs. He grasped the opportunity ), we can see that the literal vs. figura-tive sense is intuitively clear. But the difference in concreteness between the two usages of the word “grasped ” is much less explicit than in noun pairs (She broke the window vs window of opportunity ). 

B Dataset Distribution 

Figure 5 shows the frequency distribution in the 25,000 sentences extracted from Wikipedia. There are a total of 15,853 unique nouns. The X-axis shows the number of times a word occurs in a sen-tence in the extracted corpus. Figure 6 shows the probability density distribu-tion of concreteness scores in the 25,000 extracted 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

> Occurrences per word
> 0
> 2000
> 4000
> 6000
> 8000
> 10000
> Number of words

Figure 5: Word frequency distribution in the 25,000 sentences extracted from Wikipedia that we use in our experiments. 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 

> Concreteness Score
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> 0.35
> Probability Density

Figure 6: Concreteness score density distribution in the 25,000 sentences extracted from Wikipedia. 

sentences from Wikipedia. The distribution shows the concreteness scores being spread out which ensures the diversity of the extracted sentences. 

C Embedding Correlation Individual Results 

Figure 10 shows the correlation per layer for static and contextual concreteness for Llama-3.1-8B, Qwen3-8B, Gemma2-9B and GPT-OSS-20B sepa-rately. The overall trend remains consistent. Static correlation remains consistently high across all lay-ers. When provided with context, the correlation is highest in the early layers, and then gradually de-creases as we move with layers. The trend confirms that all models have similar behavior. An interesting observation is that the contextual correlation for all models increase in the later layers with varying degree. For Llama-3.1-8B, this rise is the least among the four models. It is more promi-nent in Qwen3-8B, GPT-OSS-20B and especially in Gemma2-9B. Models Static Contextual 

Llama-3.1-8B 0.98 0.91 Qwen3-8B 0.98 0.90 Gemma-2-9B 0.98 0.92 GPT-OSS-20B 0.98 0.86 

> Table 7: Pearson correlation ( r) between the last to-ken embedding and concreteness scores using different LLMs using the last hidden layer. The high correlation across all models shows the last token representation carries information about the concreteness of the term.

C.1 Correlation Table 

Table 7 reports the Pearson correlations between the predicted scores and human concreteness rat-ings from Brysbaert et al. (2014) for 25,000 sen-tences from Wikipedia, using only the final layer representation of the last input token. The static set-ting yields extremely high correlation ( r = 0 .98 ), confirming that the last token in our prompt-based method robustly captures lexical concreteness. The contextual setting shows slightly lower correlations (r = 0 .90 ), consistent with the fact that contex-tual concreteness has a high correlation with static scores, but less than the use of the word in isola-tion (Montefinese et al., 2023). The results support the validity of our probing method for measuring contextual concreteness in decoder-only LLMs. 

D Contextual Concreteness Individual Results 

Figure 11 shows the layers differentiating high concrete (literal) and low concrete (figurative) us-age of the noun for the remaining three models: Qwen3-8B, Gemma2-9B and GPT-OSS-20B. As mentioned in the main body, the behavior of the models are quite similar, with contextual concrete-ness being discriminated at the very early layers, and remains consistent through all layers. 

E Geometric Subspaces Individual Results 

Figure 12 shows the one-directional subspace per-formance in differentiating high-concrete (literal) and low-concrete (figurative) usage of the noun for the remaining models: Qwen3-8B, Gemma2-9B and GPT-OSS-20B. Like the results in the main body, we see that concreteness is compressed into a linear subspace universally in the later layers, with AUROC scores around 0.9. The one-directional compression for Qwen3-8B and Gemma2-9B is similar to Llama, starting around the late-mid lay-ers. For GPT-OSS-20B the compression begins in the early-mid layers. We believe GPT-OSS shows slightly different behavior due to its mixture-of-expert architecture (Lo et al., 2025). The results confirm that LLMs universally compress concrete-ness into a singular directional subspace in the later layers. 

E.1 Effect of Subspace Dimensionality 

We further examine the effect of increasing the di-mensionality of the concreteness subspace. Fig-ure 7 reports results for k = 2, 3, and 4 using Llama-3.1-8B; we observe the same qualitative trends across all evaluated models. As the sub-space dimensionality increases, the AUROC scores in the middle through to the later layers consistently decrease. This degradation indicates that the con-creteness signal becomes less discriminative when spread across multiple dimensions, rather than be-ing aligned along a single dominant direction. 1 6 11 16 21 26 31       

> Layer
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> AUROC Score
> k = 1
> k = 2
> k = 3
> k = 4
> Figure 7: AUROC score for classifying high and low concrete nouns using k= 1 ,2,3,4for Llama-3.1-8B.

This behavior provides additional evidence that concreteness is primarily encoded along a uni-directional axis in deeper layers. While higher-dimensional subspaces can capture more total vari-ance, they also incorporate secondary directions that are less consistently associated with concrete-ness and may reflect noise or task-irrelevant varia-tion. Consequently, expanding the subspace dilutes the discriminative signal, leading to weaker sepa-ration between literal and figurative usages. These findings further support our central claim that con-creteness is compressed into a single, coherent di-rection in the later layers of large language models, and that this compact representation is most effec-tive for downstream probing and control. F Figurative Text Datasets 

In this section, we describe how we process the datasets for our experiments. Our objective is to extract sentences where the figurative meaning is realized by a noun. 

Metaphor. We use two human-annotated metaphor datasets: VUAMC (VUA) (Steen et al., 2010) and MUNCH (Tong et al., 2024). We chose these two datasets because both datasets provide token-level metaphor annotations, indicating which word or phrase in a sentence is used metaphorically. We first identify the metaphor-annotated token and then apply part-of-speech tagging using SpaCy to deter-mine whether the metaphorically used word is a noun. If so, we extract the sentence as a metaphori-cal sample and record the noun as the target word. From each of VUA and MUNCH, we collect 1,000 such noun-metaphor sentences. To construct a bal-anced dataset for classification, we additionally sample 1,000 noun usages where the target noun is annotated as non-metaphorical . This results in an equal distribution of metaphor and literal examples. 

Idioms. We use two human-annotated idiom datasets: EPIE (Saxena and Paul, 2020) and MAG-PIE (Haagsma et al., 2020). Just like the metaphor datasets, both these datasets include span-level an-notations that mark idiomatic expressions within sentences. Following the same pipeline as in the metaphor setting, we identify the annotated id-iomatic span and apply SpaCy POS analysis to de-termine whether the idiomatic expression involves a noun. Sentences meeting this criterion are ex-tracted as positive idiom samples, with the noun recorded as the target word. We collect 1,000 id-iomatic sentences from each dataset. To form a bal-anced dataset, we additionally sample 1,000 noun usages from instances that are explicitly marked as non-idiomatic, yielding an equal distribution of positive versus negative examples. 

Metonymy. For metonymy, we use the Con-MeC (Ghosh and Jiang, 2025) and MetFuse (Ghosh and Jiang, 2026), both of which are human-annotated resources. ConMeC has instances of common noun metonymy spread across six cate-gories. MetFuse contains a combination of com-mon noun and named entity metonymy, spread across locational or institution based metonymic mapping. In these datasets, the metonymic shift is realized through a noun, and the target noun is explicitly provided alongside the sentence. We sample 1,000 metonymic and 1,000 literal noun instances from ConMeC to obtain a balanced set. MetFuse consists of 1,000 parallel sentences con-sisting of literal, metonymic, metaphoric and hy-brid expressions. We incorporate all the samples, using the metonymic sentences as positive and lit-eral sentences as negative cases. 

G Token Generation Prompt & MLP Details 

G.1 Prompts Used 

sentence: [sentence] 

On a scale of 1 to 5 (5 being the highest), in the context of the sentence, what is the concreteness of the word “ [target_word] ”? 

> Figure 8: Prompt for generating contextual concreteness token. The last token representation is used to carries information regarding the concreteness of the term.

Static Concreteness Token Generation Prompt: 

On a scale of 1 to 5 (5 being the highest), what is the concreteness of the word [target_word] ?

> Figure 9: Prompt for generating static concreteness token.

Figure 9 shows the prompt used for static con-creteness information. We simply provide the tar-get word without context. Figure 8 shows the prompt used to generate the a singular token that carries the contextual concreteness information in our prompt-based contextual probing technique. We provide the sentence, and then ask the model to predict the concreteness score of the target word in context of that sentence. 

G.2 Prompt Sensitivity Analysis 

We perform further prompt sensitivity analysis as our experiments show that the structure of the prompt affects the concreteness information in the last token representation. While our prompt-based probing method reliably captures contextual concreteness, we observe sensi-tivity to the placement of the target noun within the prompt structure. When the target noun appears as the final lexical item in the prompt, the predicted concreteness scores show extremely high correla-tion with human norms (Pearson r ≈ 0.98 ). In contrast, when the noun occurs earlier in the sen-tence—followed by several contextual tokens—the correlation decreases ( r ≈ 0.80 ± 0.10 ). This sug-gests that decoder models prioritize the most recent context in their internal representations during gen-eration, consistent with recency-weighted attention and local next-token prediction behavior. Simi-lar effects have been reported in studies showing that token salience increases toward the rightmost position during decoding in autoregressive LLMs, with downstream tasks benefiting when key infor-mation is placed near the model’s prediction point (Mialon et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020). Our prompt was designed accordingly and we selected the prompt that had the maximum correlation score for our experiments. 

G.3 MLP Details 

Our MLP follows the same settings that of Wartena (2024). It consists of three hidden layers (dimen-sions: 512 → 256 → 128), with ReLU activations and a dropout rate of 20% at each hidden layer. AdamW optimizer was used with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −5, weight decay of 1 × 10 −4, trained for 50 epochs using a batch size of 15. Using this trained regression model, we predict the concrete-ness score of the target noun using 10-fold cross-validation. In each fold, the model is trained on 9 folds and used to predict concreteness scores on the held-out fold. We compute Pearson correlations between the predicted and human-rated concrete-ness values from Brysbaert et al. (2014), averaged across folds. 

H Synthetic Data Generation 

H.1 Prompt Used 

Figure 13 shows the prompt used to generate the synthetic data using GPT-5.1. We use three few-shot exemplars of metonymic, metaphorical and idiomatic example. 

H.2 Annotation Details 

For the annotation task, we recruited students and colleagues. Their participation was completely vol-untary. Figure 14 provides the annotation guide-lines provided to the annotators. For the synthetic dataset annotation, two annotators judged 600 high-concrete and 600 low-concrete sentences. All 600 sentences were judged to be literal by both the an-notators, and 572 were judged to have the noun used in a low-concrete sense. We identified that 14 sentences were marked to low-concrete in a word-sense disambiguation sense and not in a figurative sense. We removed those cases from the final pool of 500 sentences to ensure the dataset is consistent. For the steering task, we used two different hu-man annotators to avoid bias. The guidelines were different, the annotators were asked to judge if the sentence as a whole is literal or figurative and not focus on an individual noun. 

I Additional Steering Examples & Discussion 

Table 8 are examples of steering from figurative to literal. Interestingly, we observed that when using the steering method, the literal examples resolved 

the figurative instance rather than write it write it out, which was more common in the general prompt without steering. For example, in “ The 

city attacked the new policy, ” the metonymy occurs through the noun city . The steered output directly resolves the figurative usage of the noun, rendering it literal. Therefore, the rewrites of the steered generation tended to resolve the figurative noun, while the non-steered generation tended to rewrite the sentence to get rid of the figurative instance. Table 5 are examples of steering from literal to figurative. As we mentioned earlier, previous work have shown that LLMs find it hard to go in this direction. Higher α values often led to unwanted noise of randomness. 

J Figurative Text Classification -Remaining Results 

Table 9 shows the results for remaining models: Qwen3-8B, Gemma2-9B and GPT-OSS-20B. The same trend aligns: Idioms and metaphors have better classification score, while metonymy has a lower score. As mentioned in the main body, this is due to idioms and metaphors altering concreteness more than metonymy (Lakoff, 1993; Cacciari and Tabossi, 1993; Barcelona, 2003). The consistent results across different LLM families indicate that the concreteness axis can be universally used for figurative text classification. 

K Computational Resources 

Computational resources are also an important fac-tor in this work. Our analysis requires extracting layer-wise embeddings from large LLMs and run-ning plenty of probing operations, which is compu-tationally demanding. We rely heavily on GPU ac-1 6 11 16 21 26 31 

Layer 

> 0.90
> 0.92
> 0.94
> 0.96
> 0.98
> Pearson Correlation

Without Context 

With Context (a) Llama-3.1-8B 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 

Layer 

> 0.90
> 0.92
> 0.94
> 0.96
> 0.98
> Pearson Correlation

Without Context 

With Context (b) Qwen3-8B 0 10 20 30 40 

Layer 

> 0.90
> 0.92
> 0.94
> 0.96
> 0.98
> Pearson Correlation

Without Context 

With Context 

(c) Gemma2-9B 0 5 10 15 20 

Layer 

> 0.82
> 0.84
> 0.86
> 0.88
> 0.90
> 0.92
> 0.94
> 0.96
> 0.98
> Pearson Correlation

Without Context 

With Context (d) GPT-OSS-20B 

Figure 10: Pearson correlation between embeddings of models and concreteness scores from Brysbaert et al. (2014) for every layer. 1 6 11 16 21 26 31 36 

> Layer
> 1.5
> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> Mean  (Predicted  Static)
> Low Conc. Words
> High Conc. Words

(a) Qwen3-8B 1 6 11 16 21 26 31 36 41  

> Layer
> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> Mean  (Predicted  Static)  Low Conc. Words
> High Conc. Words

(b) Gemma2-9B 1 6 11 16 21  

> Layer
> 2.0
> 1.5
> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> Mean  (Predicted  Static)
> Low Conc. Words
> High Conc. Words

(c) GPT-OSS-20B 

Figure 11: Mean δ for all layers for remaining models. 

celeration (multiple NVIDIA A100 GPUs) as well as substantial CPU time for mathematical opera-tions such as DiffMean analysis. Runtime is a prac-tical constraint: for example, layer-wise MLP prob-ing with 10-fold cross-validation on larger models can take several hours to complete. 1 6 11 16 21 26 31 

> Layer
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> AUROC Score
> k = 1

(a) Llama-3.1-8B 1 6 11 16 21 26 31 36  

> Layer
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> AUROC Score
> k = 1

(b) Qwen3-8B 1 6 11 16 21 26 31 36 41 

> Layer
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> AUROC Score
> k = 1

(c) Gemma2-9B 1 6 11 16 21  

> Layer
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> AUROC Score
> k = 1

(d) GPT-OSS-20B 

Figure 12: AUROC score for classifying high and low concrete nouns using one-directional geometric subspace for remaining models. 

Original Figurative Sentence Unsteered Rewrite Steered Literal Rewrite 

Her apology served as a bridge to mend their broken relationship. 

Her apology helped mend their broken re-lationship. F

Her apology provided a way to heal their relationship. F

His actions served as a mirror to his true intentions. 

His actions reflected his true intentions. F His actions revealed his true intentions. F

She was the gatekeeper of her family’s se-crets. 

She stood as the gatekeeper of her family’s secrets. L

Her family’s secrets were her responsibil-ity to keep. F

The city attacked the new policy. The city strongly opposed the new policy. 

L

The city’s residents and businesses were against the new policy. F

Table 8: Example of concreteness guided steering for Figurative → Literal. L indicates the rewritten sentence was literal and F means figurative. 

Qwen Gemma GPT Task Dataset Subspace Full Rep. Subspace Full Rep. Subspace Full Rep. 

Idioms MAGPIE 94.3 97.2 97.4 98.7 93.6 98.8 EPIE 93.1 97.9 97.6 98.6 91.7 98.5 Metaphor VUA 93.1 97.0 96.7 98.8 94.1 98.8 MUNCH 92.0 96.3 96.5 98.6 93.2 97.9 Metonymy ConMeC 55.4 59.4 61.2 61.5 59.3 66.5 MetFuse 85.5 97.0 86.2 98.2 85.3 97.5 

Table 9: AUROC scores for figurative text classification using Qwen3-8B, Gemma2-9B and GPT-OSS-20B comparing a unidirectional concreteness subspace learned from Wikipedia and applied to downstream datasets against a full-representation classifier trained separately on each dataset. Synthetic Data Generation Prompt 

System Prompt: You are a helpful assistant. You are given an English word that is concrete but can also be used abstractly depending on context. Here is your task: 1. Generate a sentence where this word is used in a highly concrete (or sensory) way. 2. Generate a sentence where this word is used in a less concrete (figurative) way. 

Few-shot exemplar 1 

Word: city highly concrete = The city is 5 km away from this location. less concrete = He was overwhelmed by the city .

Few-shot exemplar 2 

Word: window highly concrete = she opened the window as it was getting hot. less concrete = she saw a window of opportunity and pounced 

Few-shot exemplar 3 

Word: door highly concrete = He painted the wooden door .less concrete = He closed the door on their relationship. 

Input 

Word: [target_word] 

> Figure 13: Prompt for generating static concreteness token.

Annotation guidelines 

Concreteness denotes how physical or abstract a term is. Physical entities that can be perceived or touched are concrete terms, while words referring to intangible or abstract notions are less-concrete (or abstract term). Your task is binary classification. You will be given a sample, each sample contains a pair of sentences where the noun is used in a different way, highly-concrete or less-concrete than its usual norm. The noun is usually highly-concrete in isolation, but it can also be used in a low-concrete sense when used figuratively. The pair of sentences in each sample are: 

1. Literal Sentence. The noun is used in its usual high-concrete sense. Example: He climbed the ladder to reach the roof . Here, ladder refers to a physical ladder, and is therefore used in its usual high-concrete sense. 

2. Figurative Sentence. The noun is used in a high-concrete sense than its lexical norm, mainly in a figurative sense. Example: He climbed the corporate ladder to the position of VP . Here, ladder does not refer to its physical self, but used in a metaphorical sense, therefore is less-concrete than its lexical norm. (Note that the term does not have to be abstract. It just needs to be used in a sense than its usual norm). 

Primary Guidelines: 

1. If the noun carries its original concrete sense in the literal sentence, it is considered correct (mark as 1, else 0). 2. If the noun is used in a less-concrete sense in the supposedly figurative sentence, it is considered correct (mark as 1, else 0). 

Additional Guidelines: 

The intended figurative expressions are primarily metaphors, metonymy and idiom. If the noun is used in a less-concrete sense through word-sense disambiguation (eg. - square root of 7), please mark that sentence.