Title: Comparing Human and Large Language Model Interpretation of Implicit Information

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17085v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 00:52:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
## Comparing Human and Large Language Model Interpretation of Implicit Information 

Antonio De Santis Tommaso Bonetti Andrea Tocchetti Marco Brambilla 

Politecnico di Milano, Italy  

> Correspondence: antonio.desantis@polimi.it

Abstract 

The interpretation of implicit meanings is an integral aspect of human communication. How-ever, this framework may not transfer to inter-actions with Large Language Models (LLMs). To investigate this, we introduce the task of Implicit Information Extraction (IIE) and pro-pose an LLM-based IIE pipeline that builds a structured knowledge graph from a context sen-tence by extracting relational triplets, validating implicit inferences, and analyzing temporal re-lations. We evaluate two LLMs against crowd-sourced human judgments on two datasets. We find that humans agree with most model triplets yet consistently propose many additions, indi-cating limited coverage in current LLM-based IIE. Moreover, in our experiments, models ap-pear to be more conservative about implicit inferences than humans in socially rich con-texts, whereas humans become more conserva-tive in shorter, fact-oriented contexts. Our code is available at this URL. 

1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolution-ized Natural Language Processing (NLP), perform-ing remarkably well on a multitude of open prob-lems (Zhu et al., 2023; Shailendra et al., 2024; Fields et al., 2024) and becoming widely popu-lar due to their ability to quickly generate text nearly indistinguishable from human-generated lan-guage (Yang et al., 2024). LLM-generated content has therefore proliferated on the Web and in sev-eral professional fields (Brooks et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2025, 2024). Humans, however, commu-nicate within a specific framework that may not apply to language models (Bender et al., 2021). As semiotician Umberto Eco suggests, the meaning of human-generated text is created collaboratively, with the author and the reader engaging in the pro-cess of interpretive cooperation (Eco, 1979). This theory assigns an active role to the reader in inter-preting the implicit meaning intrinsic to any piece 

Figure 1: Comparison of the interpretation of implicit meaning in human and human-LLM communication. 

of text (see Fig. 1). Although humans tend to com-municate within this framework, this interpretive and collaborative approach may not apply when a human is interacting with LLM-generated text. Therefore, we set about analyzing and comparing humans and LLMs in terms of how they interpret implicit information. Current research regarding information extrac-tion with LLMs is rich, but lacks focus on implicit information. To bridge this gap, we propose an Implicit Information Extraction (IIE) approach that automatically builds a structured representation of the model’s understanding of a context sentence. Our method can be applied to black-box language models, as it does not require access to the model parameters or fine-tuning. The result is a knowl-edge graph (KG) with two tiers, one for relational information and the other for temporal data. The LLMs’ knowledge graphs are then compared with human answers regarding the same context sen-tences, involving both direct comparison and agree-ment questions to provide an informative compari-son that considers both quantitative and qualitative 

> arXiv:2604.17085v1 [cs.CL] 18 Apr 2026

aspects. The analysis is driven by four research questions: (RQ1) What are the main drivers of inference for LLMs and humans? (RQ2) How do LLMs compare to humans in terms of strictness 

when evaluating potential inferences? (RQ3) Can LLMs effectively parse timing relations between events? (RQ4) How strong is the consensus among humans approaching this task? 

2 Background and Related Work 

Implicit Information Extraction Implicit infor-mation (implicit meaning) is defined as the dis-tinction between “what a text says (i.e., its ex-plicit or literal meaning)” and “what is inferable from the text (i.e., its implicit meaning)” (Per-fetti and Stafura, 2015). To our knowledge, there exists little research specific to the extraction of implicit information from text. However, LLMs have recently demonstrated the ability to effec-tively derive some implicit information through in-context learning for question answering (Katz et al., 2022) and relation extraction using fine-tuning and retrieval-augmented generation (Efeoglu and Paschke, 2024). From a different perspective, in-ferable content is often modeled through Natural Language Inference (NLI), where a model judges whether a premise sentence entails a hypothesis sentence. This entailment-based notion is stricter than the definition of implicit meaning we adopt from Perfetti and Stafura (2015), since this notion includes inferable content beyond strict entailment and our goal is to extract an open set of structured triplets rather than to output a discrete label. 

Open Information Extraction Open Informa-tion Extraction (OIE) is a broad task whose goal is extracting information from text in the form of (S UBJECT , R ELATIONSHIP , O BJECT ) triplets. Standard information extraction is typically applied using a pre-defined schema of relation types, mak-ing it suitable for analyzing domain-specific text (e.g. , medical records). On the other hand, OIE removes the schema constraint, allowing it to ef-fectively deal with unstructured text that features unseen relationships. LLMs have proven to be well-suited for this task, eliminating the need for super-vised training due to the generalization capabilities developed during pre-training (Pai et al., 2024). Even in a zero-shot setting, these models have been able to match the performance of state-of-the-art supervised methods, although hallucinations are a known problem affecting their accuracy (Huang et al., 2025; Hadi et al., 2023). Techniques such as few-shot prompting and fine-tuning, however, have proven capable of mitigating this and other issues to some extent (Ling et al., 2023). 

Knowledge Graph Extraction Since OIE ex-tracts relational (S UBJECT , R ELATIONSHIP , O B-

> JECT

) triplets, it is possible to build a structured rep-resentation of a set of such triplets using a knowl-edge graph (KG). A KG is a formalism that uses nodes and edges to represent entities and their re-spective relationships. The entities are the subjects and objects of the extracted triplets, while each re-lationship edge represents one triplet (Sheth et al., 2019). Knowledge graph extraction is the process of extracting and organizing triplets in a KG. This procedure can be applied, for instance, to generate a structured knowledge model from text (Zhong et al., 2023). Furthermore, KGs have the advantage of facilitating comparison and integration due to their well-defined structure. Knowledge graph extraction using LLMs is of-ten employed as a means of eliciting the intrinsic (or parametric) knowledge of a model. Some stud-ies focus on entities and relationships (Cohen et al., 2023), while others investigate the ontological or commonsense knowledge of LLMs (Crum et al., 2024). For instance, West et al. (2022) instruct a target model to generate inferences starting from a given event based on the taxonomy of relation types provided by A TOMIC (Sap et al., 2019a). These relation types can be useful in the extraction and analysis of implicit information in general, as they cover the inference of other events, mental states, and personal attributes. Lastly, part of the exist-ing research seeks to build knowledge graphs from text in a semantically-aware fashion (Zhang and Soh, 2024; De Santis et al., 2025). Indeed, tak-ing semantics into consideration is crucial when building a KG from general-purpose text, where no pre-defined schema exists. A similar and related task is the extraction of temporal knowledge graphs. In this case, the nodes of the graph represent events and the edges rep-resent temporal relationships. This type of KG conveys the absolute and relative temporal posi-tion of events, each of which can be represented as a relational triplet in its own right (Knez and Žitnik, 2023). After the events are extracted, they can undergo different analysis steps to reveal their position in time (Rospocher et al., 2016) and dura-tion (Ma et al., 2021) as well as relationships with other events (Allen and Hayes, 1989; Ma et al., 2021; Pustejovsky et al., 2005). Additional aspects include the polarity ( i.e. , positive/negative) and the modality ( i.e. , asserted/hypothetical) of extracted events (Ma et al., 2021; Saurí et al., 2006). A rel-evant work in this field is TimeML (Pustejovsky et al., 2005), a specification language dedicated to describing events and temporal data that covers many of the aspects described above. 

3 Methodology 

Given the lack of tailored implicit information ex-traction methods in the literature, we propose a methodology specifically designed to extract im-plicit meaning and compare the results with human knowledge models. Given the prominent role of personal interpretation, we want to capture as much information as possible about how LLMs perceive language by focusing on open-ended extraction, al-lowing a deeper qualitative analysis of similarities and differences between the knowledge models of humans and LLMs. Our pipeline has three stages: information ex-traction, inference validation, and temporal analy-sis. Each of these stages is dedicated to one specific aspect of the extraction process. Fig. 2 pictures the pipeline, numbering its steps 1 through 11 

to aid identification in the paragraphs below. The output of the pipeline is a KG separated into two tiers. The first encodes the content of the text in the form of entities and relationships; the second conveys temporal information regarding the rela-tionships themselves. Each step of the pipeline is realized using few-shot prompting (see Appendix B for prompt templates). Our pipeline is fully auto-mated, model-agnostic, and suitable for black-box LLMs, as it does not require accessing the model parameters or fine-tuning. 

3.1 Information Extraction 

The first stage deals with extracting the information implied by the text, both explicitly and implicitly. The model is instructed to infer as much implicit information as possible to improve coverage. We start by extracting the entities mentioned in the context sentence 1 , which will constitute the nodes of the KG. The model is also prompted to tag them with their entity type, assigned according to the taxonomy proposed by Balali et al. (2025). We adopted this ontology because of its compre-hensiveness as well as its focus on aiding event 

> Figure 2: The proposed solution pipeline and its stages.

extraction from text. Then, the model is directed to extract relational triplets representing the con-tent of the text 2 . These are shaped as (S UBJECT ,RELATIONSHIP , O BJECT ) triplets, where subject and object are entities in the KG. The model first extracts explicit relationships, also reporting the snippet of the context corresponding to the infor-mation in each triplet. This step closely aligns with Open Information Extraction (OIE), an NLP task that can be performed at a high level by LLMs (Pai et al., 2024). Subsequently, the model is asked to extract implicit triplets, namely those that express implicit meaning. This task can be seen as a com-bination of OIE with inferential and commonsense reasoning, as these triplets should be deduced from the text. At this stage, we do not provide the model with the explicit triplets extracted in the previous step, so that implicit extraction remains conditioned only on the original sentence ( i.e. , what the model can infer from the text itself), rather than being influenced by a potentially noisy intermediate rep-resentation. The model is also given guidance in the form of a list of possible relations between the inferred triplets and the information expressed in the text to facilitate the task. These relations (re-ferred to as inference types) are adapted from the ATOMIC taxonomy (Sap et al., 2019a). Fig. 3 pro-vides an example of each. A given triplet can report the pre-conditions and post-conditions of the events in the text or information about the mentioned ac-tors, such as their intents , their emotional reactions ,and the attributes they are perceived to have. For implicit triplets, the subject and object may not belong to the extracted entities and therefore are added to the entity list. 

> Figure 3: Implicit triplets with various inference types regarding a context sentence.

The main challenges of information extraction are related to the well-defined form of the triplets, as not all information mentioned in the context sentences can be expressed in (S UBJECT , R ELA -

> TIONSHIP

, O BJECT ) form. An exemplary use case is that of unary relations, i.e. , sentences without an object. In this occurrence, the triplet will feature a < NONE > tag in place of the object. For instance, “Perry was running” is encoded as (P ERRY , WAS -RUNNING , < NONE >). However, representing other grammatical con-structs is not as straightforward. One such case is subordination , where a subordinate clause acts as the complement of an independent clause. An example is “Jordan heard Bob was looking for her”. Another case is that of aspect , namely the expres-sion of an action’s progression in time, which can be realized by prefixing the action verb with an aspectual verb. For instance, in “Chris stopped talk-ing”, the action of talking can be considered the object of the aspectual verb “stopped”. These oc-currences are handled using an approach inspired by RDF reification (Manola and Miller, 2004), a mechanism that creates new KG nodes representing complete triplets to express statements about them. Similarly, in our method, triplets may include an-other triplet as their object 3 : this creates a (po-tentially recursive) nesting structure that fits subor-dination and aspect. According to this framework, “Jordan heard Bob was looking for her” is encoded as (J ORDAN , HEARD , (B OB , WAS LOOKING FOR ,JORDAN )), with (B OB , WAS LOOKING FOR , J OR -

> DAN

) being added to the nodes of the KG. The same method is applied for representing sentences that use aspectual verbs. In this case, the general action being described becomes the nested triplet, while the verb describing its progress is used as the relationship. Compared to the use of reification for subordination, some additional adjustments are required to improve clarity, such as repeating the subject. Recalling the example above, the repre-sentation for “Chris stopped talking” is (C HRIS ,

> STOPPED

, (C HRIS , IS TALKING , < NONE >)). The reification of triplets representing subordi-nate clauses poses a new problem, i.e. , depend-ing on the semantics of the respective indepen-dent clauses, the events and states described by the nested triplets can have different truth values, as implied by their modality. Modality is a feature that expresses the speaker’s degree of commitment to the events being referred to in a text (Saurí et al., 2006), and as such it significantly influences the meaning that can be attributed to a nested triplet. Possible modalities include factive and asserted ,concerning events implied to be true or referred to as if [they] really occurred (Balali et al., 2025), as opposed to modal , conditional , and even neg-ative . Nested triplets whose modality is asserted ,

factive , or negative can be directly included in the KG. However, events with different modalities are uncertain, hence they cannot be added to the KG as-is. Ideally, the LLM should identify the modality of each nested triplet. However, initial experiments showed various models had difficulties in tagging triplets, achieving an accuracy of about 65% when asked to identify whether a relational triplet was 

asserted . As a result, we decided not to consider nested triplets as valid by themselves. This deci-sion was also supported by the observation that triplets whose truth value is fairly clear should be extracted by the model as implicit relationships. Lastly, the model is given additional instructions to improve the formal quality and homogeneity of the extracted triplets. The LLM is instructed to use the present tense for each triplet’s relationship. Fur-thermore, the relationship should be a single verb, with exceptions for prepositions in phrasal verbs and modal verbs prefixing an action verb. Con-cerning the triplets’ objects, indirect complements should be reported by including their preposition in the relationship and using the relevant KG entity as the object, e.g. , “The bracelet belonged to Jill” is encoded as ( BRACELET , BELONGS TO, J ILL ). Ad-ditionally, subject complements should be reported in the object for clarity, e.g. , “Todd is athletic” be-comes (T ODD , IS , ATHLETIC ). 

3.2 Inference Validation 

The second stage examines implicit triplets, fil-tering out and correcting potentially unrealistic or unsubstantiated inferences to improve the precision of the KG. This is complementary to the previous stage which focuses on coverage over accuracy. In the inference challenge step 5 , inferred triplets are individually analyzed by the model to determine whether they are unsupported and should therefore be discarded. At this stage, the model acts as its own critic (West et al., 2022). For every discarded triplet, the model must also provide a jus-tification. Since reliable confidence estimation for black-box LLMs remains challenging (Geng et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023), we guide this valida-tion step through prompt instructions and examples of deducible and non-deducible triplets, implicitly tuning the model’s discard criterion. When a triplet is discarded, it undergoes infer-ence correction 6 . In this step, the model is given the triplet along with the reason why it was dis-carded (generated in the previous step) and it is asked to issue a correction. The LLM is required to strike a balance between addressing the reason for which the original triplet was discarded and not completely subverting its meaning. In case this is impossible ( e.g. , if the original triplet’s mean-ing would need to be significantly altered), the prompt instructs the model to simply avoid correct-ing the triplet. Note that the statement generated as a correction is not automatically accepted, as it also undergoes inference challenge and, potentially, correction. A simple safeguard is implemented to prevent triplets from entering an infinite challenge-discard-correction loop, i.e. , after a triplet (and its subsequent corrections) has been discarded three times, it is rejected without being corrected again. Two additional steps are implemented to com-plete the inference validation stage. Duplicate re-moval 4 is applied to every triplet before inference challenge and allows to directly discard it in case it is redundant, i.e. , semantically equivalent to a statement in the set of explicit triplets and vali-dated implicit triplets. The redundancy check is performed by the model itself via few-shot prompt-ing. Inference explanation 7 , instead, aims to shed light on the model’s inference process. For every validated implicit triplet, the LLM is instructed to provide a set of explicit triplets that explain its infer-ence. While these premises cannot be considered a rigorous explanation of the process that generated a specific triplet, they can still offer some insight into how the model deduces implicit triplets. 

3.3 Temporal Analysis 

The last stage focuses on the temporal information regarding the extracted triplets, an aspect that was not considered up to this point. In the information extraction stage, temporal metadata was purposely ignored, making the triplets more formally homo-geneous. However, temporal relations become rele-vant when considering the set of triplets stemming from a given context. For this reason, this stage focuses on the triplets’ position in time, both in absolute terms and relative to each other. The statements are studied individually to deter-mine whether they are events (defined as situations that happen or occur, both punctual and extended in time) or states (defined as conditions or circum-stances that hold true) 8 . At the same time, the model is asked to extract, for all triplets that have it, an absolute temporal reference that grounds the event to a specific moment in time or a duration 9 .After this process is complete, the model is asked to examine the pairwise temporal relationships be-tween triplets 10 to generate a timeline regarding the events described in the context sentence. The model assigns a relation type to each pair of triplets, according to the following taxonomy: before , after ,

while , or none (Ma et al., 2021). As a safeguard against hallucinations and output variability, triplet pairs are submitted in both possible orders. After parsing the model output, the specified relationship is only assigned if the two pairs are tagged with consistent types 11 , otherwise, the triplets are con-sidered unrelated. Note that the only consistent relationship types for the two permutations of a triplet pair are before -after and while -while .

4 Experimental Setup 

We test our methodology on two target LLMs: Mis-tral Large 2 (Mistral AI, 2024) and GPT-4o mini (Hurst et al., 2024). We run experiments by exe-cuting the pipeline on 30 English-language context sentences in total, 15 randomly drawn from the SocialIQA dataset (Sap et al., 2019b) and 15 from premises in the COPA dataset (Gordon et al., 2012). Human judgments were collected from two groups. SocialIQA was annotated by 206 volun-teer university students of a variety of nationalities. Their median age was 24, and the gender split was 76.6% male and 23.4% female. COPA was anno-tated by 101 MTurk workers. They were compen-sated $3.50-$4.50 per assignment, proportional to form length, and were recruited under strict qual-ity constraints (at least 100 approved HITs and an approval rate of at least 98%). We did not col-lect additional self-reported demographics beyond these platform qualifications. To ensure annotation reliability, each assignment included five attention-check questions based on obviously false fabricated triplets. We excluded annotators who failed at least one check, retaining 205 university students and 75 MTurk annotators for analysis. Data was collected anonymously via Microsoft Forms and free-text fields were screened to avoid releasing personal data. The form has five sec-tions that mirror the stages of our pipeline: triplet classification a , inference correction review b ,

event/state classification c , timing comparison d ,and model error correction e . For task manage-ability, we split it into six forms (three per model), each covering five context sentences, and each re-spondent completed one form. In a , participants label each triplet as factual, deducible, or wrong. In b , they rate the model’s discard decisions and, if they agree with the discard, the model’s stated reasons and corrections for a randomly selected dis-carded triplet per sentence. In c , they label triplets as events or states, and in d , they judge temporal relations. Finally, in e , they review the final triplet set, flag any removals, and add missing triplets. 

5 Results and Discussion 

The main metric for comparison is Model-Human Agreement (MHA), i.e. , the ratio of questions for which human consensus agrees with the model answer. For closed questions featured in triplet classification , event/state classification , and tim-ing comparison , the human consensus outcome is computed by majority vote and can be directly com-pared to the model answer. In these cases, direct comparison also allows us to compute Cohen’s κ

statistic to measure inter-rater reliability between models and humans. Questions in the inference cor-rection review section, instead, directly ask the eval-uator about their degree of agreement with model decisions. In this case, the human consensus is measured in terms of polarity, i.e. , each answer is assigned an agreement score (1 for fully agree , 0                                                         

> SocialIQA COPA Section Metric Mistral GPT Mistral GPT
> Triplet MHA 66.2% 55.9% 74.9% 64.9% classification κ0.46 0.25 0.44 0.43 Event/state MHA 94.7% 86.3% 87.7% 90.9% classification κ0.89 0.72 0.73 0.82 Timing MHA 60.0% 33.3% 45.5% 33.3% comparison κ0.46 0.15 0.19 0.19 ICR: discard MHA 75.0% 50.0% 100% 88.9% ICR: reason MHA 100% 80.0% 100% 88.9% ICR: correction MHA 83.3% 100% 100% 88.9% MEC: removal MHA 96.7% 95.2% 85.9% 94.4%

Table 1: LLM-human agreement metrics by section; see Section 5 for metric definitions. In ICR, discard is com-puted on reviewed discarded triplets, while reason and 

correction are conditional follow-up scores computed only when annotators reached those questions. 

for somewhat agree , -1 for disagree ). The eval-uators are collectively considered to concur with the model decision if the average of these scores is positive. Lastly, considering triplet removal in 

model error correction , we deem humans to be in agreement with a model-generated triplet if less than 50% of them flag it as wrong. On the other hand, questions in model error correction that ask humans to add missing triplets are inspected to re-veal their inference type, their relationship with the model output, and whether they are equivalent to triplets the model previously generated and dis-carded. This analysis helps localize coverage gaps: 

Fact additions indicate missing explicit extraction; non-Fact additions indicate missing implicit extrac-tion; overlaps with discarded triplets point to over-pruning in validation; and modification-type addi-tions reflect extraction errors in existing triplets. We also compare how the outputs of the two LLMs overlap on the same sentences. Each triplet from one model is checked against the triplets gener-ated by the other model and subsequently classified as either an exact match (if identical), a semantic match (if semantically equivalent), or no match .In general, Model-Human Agreement is mod-erate and varies across evaluation sections, with Mistral outperforming GPT in most settings (Ta-ble 1). Both models attain their highest MHA in 

model error correction , followed by event/state classification , while timing comparison yields the lowest agreement metrics. According to McHugh’s (2012) interpretation, κ indicates weak-to-minimal agreement for triplet classification and timing com-parison , whereas agreement is substantially higher for event/state classification (Table 1). At the output level, GPT is consistently more SocialIQA COPA Metric Mistral GPT Mistral GPT                         

> Generated triplets (median) 9612 5Human additions (median) 13 16 16 6Human additions overlap with discarded triplets 9.6% 12.5% 1.6% 5.9% Human removal rate 3.3% 4.8% 14.1% 5.8% Hallucinated triplets (pre-validation) 8.0% 0% 0% 0% Hallucinated triplets (post-validation) 0% 0% 0% 0%

Table 2: Summary statistics for the outputs of the target models, averaged over the context sentences. 

SocialIQA COPA Match type Mistral GPT Mistral GPT 

Exact match 23.9% 32.3% 10.3% 27.5% Semantic match 20.9% 33.3% 13.6% 27.5% No match 55.2% 34.4% 76.1% 44.9% 

Table 3: Overlaps in the model outputs by match type. 

concise than Mistral (Table 2). Nonetheless, nei-ther model achieves full coverage, as reflected by substantial human additions (Table 2). Halluci-nated implicit relationships are rare. They appear pre-validation for Mistral on SocialIQA but are re-moved during validation, and are absent on COPA for both models (Table 2). Lastly, model outputs overlap to some extent. Overlap is higher on So-cialIQA, while on COPA it decreases, especially for Mistral, consistent with Mistral producing a larger volume of triplets and thus accumulating more unmatched relationships (Table 3). 

RQ1: Inference Drivers A noticeable difference between humans and LLMs concerns the interpre-tation of explicit (or factual ) and implicit (or de-ducible ) triplets. In particular, many triplets the models extracted as deducible were instead deemed 

factual by the evaluators (see Table 4). This pattern holds across both datasets and suggests both mod-els adopt a fairly literal interpretation of explicit triplets, requiring them to be mentioned in the text almost verbatim. On the other hand, humans tend to classify triplets that express the content of the text using different wording as factual . Addition-ally, examining the inference types of human and model-generated triplets reveals further patterns. Fig. 4 highlights a dataset shift where COPA is more fact -centric, with comparatively fewer intent 

(and, more generally, fewer non-fact) inferences than SocialIQA. Evaluators also frequently pro-                                                                                    

> SocialIQA (Mistral) COPA (Mistral)
> ℓh=fℓh=dℓh=wℓh=fℓh=dℓh=w
> ℓm=f33.8% 2.8% 0.0% 12.3% 3.0% 1.0%
> ℓm=d9.9% 28.2% 2.8% 2.5% 59.6% 6.9%
> ℓm=w0.0% 18.3% 4.2% 0.0% 11.8% 3.0%
> SocialIQA (GPT) COPA (GPT)
> ℓh=fℓh=dℓh=wℓh=fℓh=dℓh=w
> ℓm=f36.8% 1.5% 1.5% 29.7% 9.5% 2.7%
> ℓm=d25.0% 19.1% 0.0% 10.8% 28.4% 5.4%
> ℓm=w2.9% 13.2% 0.0% 1.4% 5.4% 6.8%

Table 4: Confusion matrices for LLM-generated triplets from the triplet-classification section, where ℓh is the human consensus label, ℓm is the model-assigned la-bel, f stands for factual , d stands for deducible , and w

stands for wrong .

Figure 4: Triplet counts grouped by inference type. Each stack comprises LLM-generated triplets, human additions with no correspondence to the output, and hu-man additions that modify an LLM-generated triplet. 

pose pre-conditions , post-conditions , and attributes 

missing from model outputs, showing that both models under-generate these inference types rel-ative to human additions and modifications (Fig. 4). This gap is especially visible for GPT on So-cialIQA, while on COPA the mismatch concen-trates more on the non-factual inference types, con-sistent with the dataset’s shorter, more fact-oriented contexts. 

RQ2: Strictness We operationalize strictness 

as the tendency to label candidate inferences as 

wrong as defined in Table 4. On SocialIQA, both models prove much stricter than human evalua-tors. The model-induced label split differs signif-icantly from the human distribution (chi-squared test; p-val<0.001 for both models). This is also sup-ported by humans discarding significantly fewer triplets than the models (one-sided binomial test; p-val<0.001 for both models). This gap is directly visible in Table 4. For GPT on SocialIQA, humans label only 1.5% of triplets as wrong , while for Mis-Section SocialIQA COPA           

> Triplet classification 83.2% 79.9% Inference correction review 65.1% 77.6% Event/state classification 81.6% 89.3% Timing comparison 68.5% 77.0% Model error correction 88.7% 84.3%
> Table 5: Human majority agreement rates by section.

tral, the human wrong rate is 7.0% . In practice, many triplets rejected as wrong by the models are instead judged factual or deducible by the crowd, indicating an over-pruning tendency. On COPA, the strictness picture changes and the label distributions become more aligned. Under the same chi-squared test, we do not reject compatibil-ity between model and human label distributions (Mistral p-val=0.1346, GPT p-val=0.9407; n.s.). Likewise, the strictness-rate comparison does not provide evidence that humans discard fewer triplets than the models (one-sided binomial test; Mistral p-val=0.0647, GPT p-val=0.7055; n.s.). A key driver of this shift is a substantial increase in human strict-ness. The human wrong rate rises from 7.0% to 

10 .9% for Mistral and, most notably, from 1.5% 

to 14 .9% for GPT (Table 4). A plausible explana-tion is that COPA contexts are shorter and more fact-oriented, providing less contextual support for speculative inferred triplets. As a result, evalua-tors more often deem such inferences unsupported and label them as wrong . Conversely, SocialIQA describes richer social situations where multiple implicit details can be reasonably inferred, lead-ing humans to retain many inferences that models discard. This human-side shift is also reflected in inference correction review (ICR). Discard de-cisions are less contested on COPA than on So-cialIQA ( e.g. , GPT disagreement-majority drops from 50.0% to 11.1%, with average polarity in-creasing from 0.456 to 0.684), indicating stronger human alignment with discarding in the more fact-oriented setting. Consistently, the post-validation model error correction stage shows stricter human filtering on COPA, with higher removal rates ( e.g. ,14.1% vs. 3.3% for Mistral; Table 2). 

RQ3: Timing Information LLMs perform well in event/state classification , with both models re-porting high agreement with humans (Table 1). By contrast, timing comparison remains the most chal-lenging component with the lowest agreement. A recurring source of disagreement is the option “ No clear relation ”. While humans rarely select it, mod-els abstain substantially more often, both on So-cialIQA ( 33 .3% vs. 6.7% ) and on COPA ( 34 .8% 

overall; GPT 50 .0% , Mistral 18 .2% , vs. 0% for human consensus). This suggests that models are conservative when temporal relations are not ex-plicitly stated, whereas humans more readily infer event order from implicit cues. Qualitative inspec-tion indicates that several missed relations could be recovered from commonsense event sequences or chaining other explicit triplets, highlighting tem-poral structure recovery as a key bottleneck. 

RQ4: Human Consensus Human consensus is consistently above random chance across all sections and both datasets (one-sided t-tests vs. chance; all p-val<0.001), indicating that crowd judgments provide a reliable signal. At the same time, consensus strength varies by section (Ta-ble 5). On SocialIQA, majority agreement is high-est in triplet classification (83.2%), event/state classification (81.6%), and model error correction 

(88.7%), while it drops in inference correction re-view (65.1%) and timing comparison (68.5%). On COPA, we observe similarly strong agreement over-all, with the lowest consensus again occurring in 

inference correction review and timing comparison .These patterns suggest that disagreement is not ran-dom but concentrated in the most subjective steps of the pipeline ( e.g. , judging whether an inference is sufficiently supported and recovering implicit temporal structure) where multiple interpretations may remain plausible even for careful annotators. 

6 Conclusion 

We introduced the task of implicit information extraction (IIE) together with a methodology for studying it with LLMs using few-shot prompt-ing to build a structured knowledge graph. The pipeline extracts relational triplets, validates and corrects implicit inferences while explicitly stat-ing their premises, and analyzes temporal relations among validated triplets. Our results show moder-ate model–human agreement with some variation across sub-tasks and datasets. Models are more conservative than humans on SocialIQA, while on COPA the gap attenuates as humans adopt stricter rejection criteria in fact-oriented contexts. Both models also show coverage limitations and dis-tinct behaviors across sub-tasks, suggesting that the methodology could benefit from tuning to the target LLM and domain. Limitations 

One potential limitation of this study is that hu-man judgments of implicit meaning are inherently variable, since text interpretation can depend on annotator background and reading strategies. We address this by collecting multiple independent judgments from a large annotator pool (300+ par-ticipants) and by filtering low-quality responses via attention checks. However, the evaluation still covers a limited number of examples per dataset and a small set of LLMs, and may therefore not capture the full variability of implicit interpretation. Additionally, cross-dataset comparisons should be interpreted with caution, since the study was ex-tended to include a second dataset at a later stage and the annotation protocol therefore did not fully control for annotator-population differences across datasets. As a result, some observed differences may reflect annotator-population effects in addition to dataset properties. 

Ethical Considerations 

The lack of transparency about how Large Lan-guage Models process and interpret text poses seri-ous ethical questions, particularly considering their widespread adoption in professional fields such as scientific research, journalism, and law, as well as their popularity among the general public for per-sonal use. Our work aims to shed light on how LLMs interpret the implicit meanings embedded in text, thus deepening our understanding of these models and contributing to their interpretability. We believe this will be beneficial in enabling a more trustworthy adoption of Large Language Models. 

References 

James F Allen and Patrick J Hayes. 1989. Moments and Points in an Interval-Based Temporal Logic. Compu-tational Intelligence , 5(3):225–238. Ali Balali, Masoud Asadpour, and Seyed Hossein Jafari. 2025. COfEE: A Comprehensive Ontology for Event Extraction from Text. Computer Speech & Language ,89:101702. Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big? In FAccT ’21: 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , pages 610–623. ACM. Creston Brooks, Samuel Eggert, and Denis Peskoff. 2024. The Rise of AI-Generated Content in Wikipedia. Computing Research Repository (CoRR) ,abs/2410.08044. Roi Cohen, Mor Geva, Jonathan Berant, and Amir Globerson. 2023. Crawling The Internal Knowledge-Base of Language Models. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2023 ,pages 1811–1824. Association for Computational Linguistics. Elias Crum, Antonio De Santis, Manon Ovide, Jiaxin Pan, Alessia Pisu, Nicolas Lazzari, and Sebastian Rudolph. 2024. Enriching ontologies with disjoint-ness axioms using large language models. In Pro-ceedings of the 2nd workshop on Knowledge Base Construction from Pre-Trained Language Models (KBC-LM 2024) co-located with the 23rd Interna-tional Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2024) , pages 1–12. Antonio De Santis, Marco Balduini, Federico De Santis, Andrea Proia, Arsenio Leo, Marco Brambilla, and Emanuele Della Valle. 2025. Integrating large lan-guage models and knowledge graphs for extraction and validation of textual test data. In The Semantic Web – ISWC 2024 , pages 304–323, Cham. Springer Nature Switzerland. Umberto Eco. 1979. Lector in fabula. La cooperazione interpretativa nei testi narrativi . Bompiani. Sefika Efeoglu and Adrian Paschke. 2024. Relation Extraction with Fine-Tuned Large Language Mod-els in Retrieval Augmented Generation Frameworks. 

Computing Research Repository (CoRR) .John Fields, Kevin Chovanec, and Praveen Madiraju. 2024. A Survey of Text Classification With Trans-formers: How Wide? How Large? How Long? How Accurate? How Expensive? How Safe? IEEE Ac-cess , 12:6518–6531. Jiahui Geng, Fengyu Cai, Yuxia Wang, Heinz Koeppl, Preslav Nakov, and Iryna Gurevych. 2024. A Survey of Confidence Estimation and Calibration in Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Con-ference of the North American Chapter of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), NAACL 2024 , pages 6577–6595. Association for Computational Linguistics. Andrew Gordon, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Melissa Roem-mele. 2012. SemEval-2012 task 7: Choice of plau-sible alternatives: An evaluation of commonsense causal reasoning. In *SEM 2012: The First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Seman-tics – Volume 1: Proceedings of the main conference and the shared task, and Volume 2: Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Eval-uation (SemEval 2012) , pages 394–398, Montréal, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Muhammad Usman Hadi, Rizwan Qureshi, Abbas Shah, Muhammad Irfan, Anas Zafar, Muhammad Bilal Shaikh, Naveed Akhtar, Jia Wu, Seyedali Mirjalili, and 1 others. 2023. A Survey on Large Language Models: Applications, Challenges, Limitations, and Practical Usage. Authorea Preprints , 3. Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. 2025. A Survey on Hallucination in Large Lan-guage Models: Principles, Taxonomy, Challenges, and Open Questions. ACM Transactions on Informa-tion Systems , 43(2). Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P. Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, Alek-sander Madry, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Borzunov, Alex Carney, Alex Chow, Alex Kir-illov, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, and 79 others. 2024. GPT-4o System Card. Computing Research Reposi-tory (CoRR) .Uri Katz, Mor Geva, and Jonathan Berant. 2022. Infer-ring Implicit Relations in Complex Questions with Language Models. pages 2548–2566. Timotej Knez and Slavko Žitnik. 2023. Event-Centric Temporal Knowledge Graph Construction: A Survey. 

Mathematics , 11(23). Weixin Liang, Yaohui Zhang, Mihai Codreanu, Jiayu Wang, Hancheng Cao, and James Zou. 2025. The Widespread Adoption of Large Language Model-Assisted Writing Across Society. Computing Re-search Repository (CoRR) , abs/2502.09747. Weixin Liang, Yaohui Zhang, Zhengxuan Wu, Haley Lepp, Wenlong Ji, Xuandong Zhao, Hancheng Cao, Sheng Liu, Siyu He, Zhi Huang, Diyi Yang, Christo-pher Potts, Christopher D. Manning, and James Y. Zou. 2024. Mapping the Increasing Use of LLMs in Scientific Papers. Computing Research Repository (CoRR) .Chen Ling, Xujiang Zhao, Xuchao Zhang, Yanchi Liu, Wei Cheng, Haoyu Wang, Zhengzhang Chen, Takao Osaki, Katsushi Matsuda, Haifeng Chen, and 1 others. 2023. Improving Open Information Extraction with Large Language Models: A Study on Demonstra-tion Uncertainty. Computing Research Repository (CoRR) .Mingyu Derek Ma, Jiao Sun, Mu Yang, Huang Kung-Hsiang, Nuan Wen, Shikhar Singh, Rujun Han, and Nanyun Peng. 2021. EventPlus: A Temporal Event Understanding Pipeline. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies: Demonstrations , pages 56– 65, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Frank Manola and Eric Miller. 2004. RDF Reification. W3C Recommendation, W3C. Mary L McHugh. 2012. Interrater Reliability: The Kappa Statistic. Biochemia Medica , 22(3):276–282. Mistral AI. 2024. Large Enough. [Accessed: February 26, 2025]. Liu Pai, Wenyang Gao, Wenjie Dong, Lin Ai, Ziwei Gong, Songfang Huang, Li Zongsheng, Ehsan Hoque, Julia Hirschberg, and Yue Zhang. 2024. A Survey on Open Information Extraction from Rule-based Model to Large Language Model. In Findings of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 ,pages 9586–9608, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Charles A. Perfetti and Joseph Z. Stafura. 2015. Com-prehending Implicit Meanings in Text without Making Inferences , page 1–18. Cambridge University Press. James Pustejovsky, Robert Ingria, Roser Saurí, José M. Castaño, Jessica Littman, Robert J. Gaizauskas, An-drea Setzer, Graham Katz, and Inderjeet Mani. 2005. The Specification Language TimeML. In The Lan-guage of Time - A Reader , pages 545–558. Oxford University Press. Marco Rospocher, Marieke Van Erp, Piek Vossen, Antske Fokkens, Itziar Aldabe, German Rigau, Aitor Soroa, Thomas Ploeger, and Tessel Bogaard. 2016. Building Event-Centric Knowledge Graphs from News. Journal of Web Semantics , 37:132–151. Maarten Sap, Ronan Le Bras, Emily Allaway, Chan-dra Bhagavatula, Nicholas Lourie, Hannah Rashkin, Brendan Roof, Noah A Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2019a. Atomic: An Atlas of Machine Commonsense for If-Then Reasoning. In The Thirty-Third AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2019, The Thirty-First Innovative Applications of Artificial In-telligence Conference, IAAI 2019, The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2019 , pages 3027–3035. Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. 2019b. Social IQa: Com-monsense Reasoning about Social Interactions. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 4463– 4473, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Roser Saurí, Marc Verhagen, and James Pustejovsky. 2006. Annotating and Recognizing Event Modality in Text. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth Interna-tional Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Soci-ety Conference , pages 333–339, Melbourne Beach, Florida, USA. AAAI Press. Pasi Shailendra, Rudra Chandra Ghosh, Rajdeep Ku-mar, and Nitin Sharma. 2024. Survey of Large Lan-guage Models for Answering Questions Across Vari-ous Fields. In 2024 10th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS) , volume 1, pages 520–527. Amit Sheth, Swati Padhee, and Amelie Gyrard. 2019. Knowledge Graphs and Knowledge Networks: The Story in Brief. IEEE Internet Computing , 23(4):67– 75. Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Jack Hessel, Jena D. Hwang, Liwei Jiang, Ronan Le Bras, Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, and Yejin Choi. 2022. Symbolic Knowledge Distillation: from General Language Models to Commonsense Models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL 2022 , pages 4602–4625. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Jingfeng Yang, Hongye Jin, Ruixiang Tang, Xiao-tian Han, Qizhang Feng, Haoming Jiang, Shaochen Zhong, Bing Yin, and Xia Hu. 2024. Harnessing the Power of LLMs in Practice: A Survey on Chat-GPT and Beyond. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data , 18(6):1–32. Bowen Zhang and Harold Soh. 2024. Extract, Define, Canonicalize: An LLM-based Framework for Knowl-edge Graph Construction. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing, EMNLP 2024 , pages 9820–9836. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jiaxin Zhang, Zhuohang Li, Kamalika Das, Bradley A. Malin, and Kumar Sricharan. 2023. SAC 3: Re-liable Hallucination Detection in Black-Box Lan-guage Models via Semantic-aware Cross-check Con-sistency. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, Singapore, De-cember 6-10, 2023 , pages 15445–15458. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lingfeng Zhong, Jia Wu, Qian Li, Hao Peng, and Xin-dong Wu. 2023. A Comprehensive Survey on Auto-matic Knowledge Graph Construction. ACM Com-puting Surveys , 56(4). Yutao Zhu, Huaying Yuan, Shuting Wang, Jiongnan Liu, Wenhan Liu, Chenlong Deng, Zhicheng Dou, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023. Large Language Models for Information Retrieval: A Survey. Computing Research Repository (CoRR) .

A Comparison with Natural Language Inference (NLI) 

This appendix section reports a set of auxiliary Nat-ural Language Inference (NLI) experiments used to compare a NLI baseline with the human judgments and the pipeline’s internal discard decisions. The goal is to quantify how a strong off-the-shelf NLI model behaves when asked to validate extracted triplets against the original context, how it com-pares with LLM and human judgments and to what extent it can be used as an external validation tool. 

Experimental Setup. For each triplet, we build an NLI pair which consists of (i) a premise ,which is the original context sentence, and (ii) a hypothesis , which is a verbalized version of the extracted triplet. This is because NLI ex-pects text, not structured triplets. As NLI model, we use microsoft/deberta-large-mnli 1 and record the softmax probabilities pent (entailment), 

pneu (neutral), and pcon (contradiction). We also report entail_rate as the fraction of items where entailment is the argmax label. We investigate and report three complementary checks: (Check 1) NLI probabilities grouped by the human label (F ACTUAL /D EDUCIBLE /W RONG ). 

(Check 2) grouped by the pipeline ( i.e. , LLM-side) label (F ACTUAL /D EDUCIBLE /W RONG ), where WRONG corresponds to the model discarding the triplet. (Check 3) targeted disagreement clas-sification focusing on: Group A = human non-WRONG but model discarded, and Group B = hu-man W RONG but model kept. 

A.1 Triplet verbalization for NLI 

Since the NLI model consumes textual hypothe-ses, each triplet must be converted into a short sentence. We use a lightweight verbalizer with a small inventory of templates and nested triplets are rendered recursively. Table 6 summarizes the normalization and templating rules used to map entities/predicates and handle missing arguments. The verbalization is intentionally lightweight and prioritizes determinism over perfect fluency, so as to avoid introducing additional variability or biases that could come along by having an LLM perform the verbalization step. 

A.2 Results Check 1. Across both datasets and both LLMs, FACTUAL triplets tend to receive high entailment probability and entail rate, suggesting that the NLI model behaves consistently with humans on fac-tual statements. D EDUCIBLE triplets typically re-ceive lower entailment and higher neutral proba-bility than F ACTUAL , which is expected as com-monsense “deducibility” often goes beyond strict textual entailment, so NLI appropriately assigns intermediate support. The W RONG category shows the largest variability across settings, as the NLI model sometimes assigns high entailment even to triplets that humans label as W RONG . This does                               

> 1https://huggingface.co/microsoft/deberta-large-mnli Rule Trigger / input Deterministic output Example
> Token splitting entities and predicates in camelCase split into spaced tokens strangeLooks →“strange looks”
> isUnfamiliar →“is unfamiliar” Minimal predicate rewrite predicate in a fixed rewrite list apply rewrite before verbalization hasAttribute →“has” Missing argument handling argument is <none> or missing render missing slot as empty and collapse whitespace
> (teammates, communicate, <none>)
> →“Teammates communicate” Nested triplets object is a triplet render inner triplet recursively, attaching via default connector that (husband, questions, (wife, loves, husband))
> →“Husband questions that wife loves husband” Same-subject connector object is a triplet, inner subject equals outer subject, predicate is in fixed list drop inner subject and use a predicate-specific connector (e.g. ,to ,by ,when )
> (teammates, want, (teammates, communicate, <none>))
> →“Teammates want to communicate”

Table 6: Set of verbalization rules for converting triplets into NLI hypotheses. 

Dataset LLM Group mean pent mean pneu mean pcon entail_rate 

COPA GPT-4o mini Factual 0.959 0.040 0.001 0.968 COPA GPT-4o mini Deducible 0.712 0.261 0.027 0.719 COPA GPT-4o mini Wrong 0.533 0.415 0.052 0.636 COPA Mistral Large 2 Factual 0.949 0.047 0.004 0.967 COPA Mistral Large 2 Deducible 0.414 0.536 0.049 0.388 COPA Mistral Large 2 Wrong 0.235 0.734 0.031 0.182 SocialIQA GPT-4o mini Factual 0.925 0.035 0.040 0.952 SocialIQA GPT-4o mini Deducible 0.560 0.435 0.005 0.583 SocialIQA GPT-4o mini Wrong 0.740 0.239 0.021 0.857 SocialIQA Mistral Large 2 Factual 0.830 0.111 0.058 0.846 SocialIQA Mistral Large 2 Deducible 0.317 0.568 0.115 0.167 SocialIQA Mistral Large 2 Wrong 0.060 0.098 0.842 0.000 

Table 7: Check 1. NLI probabilities grouped by human label (F ACTUAL /D EDUCIBLE /W RONG ). 

not necessarily indicate a problem with the human labels, but rather, it reflects known failure modes of NLI used as a proxy for support, including treating beliefs, reported speech or accusations as objec-tive facts, and over-reliance on lexical overlap. We analyze these patterns qualitatively in A.3. 

Check 2. Grouping by the LLM label provides a complementary view to Check 1. As expected, triplets that the LLM deems as F ACTUAL consis-tently result in higher entailment probability and rate, D EDUCIBLE lies in between F ACTUAL and WRONG , typically shifting probability toward neu-trality. This is consistent with the intended seman-tics that inferred triplets are plausible but not neces-sarily entailed by the context. Triplets discarded by the LLM ( i.e. , W RONG ) further shift probability to-ward neutral and/or contradiction, suggesting that the NLI model agrees with most of the pipeline’s discard decisions. This is especially evident for COPA with Mistral Large 2 where none of the discarded triplets by the LLM were classified as entailed by NLI. 

Check 3. Table 9 isolates two disagreement regimes: (A) triplets labeled non-W RONG by hu-mans but discarded by the LLM pipeline, and (B) triplets labeled W RONG by humans but kept by the pipeline. Across settings, these cases tend to be inherently difficult for the NLI model. Com-pared to Checks 1 and 2, they often show more neutral mass and lower confidence overall, sug-gesting limited diagnostic value from NLI alone. Still, Check 3 is useful as a targeted disagreement analysis. For GPT outputs, Group B frequently re-mains NLI-plausible even when humans mark the triplet as W RONG , a pattern commonly driven by lexical overlap or pragmatic plausibility (see A.3). Conversely, some settings exhibit the opposite be-havior, where disagreement cases concentrate clear contradictions. Overall, the main takeaway is that disagreement triplets are a concentrated source of ambiguity. NLI does not consistently side with ei-ther humans or the pipeline, but it may help identify which mismatches warrant qualitative inspection. 

A.3 Qualitative analysis of common failure modes 

We summarize representative patterns observed in some of the mismatches. These should be inter-preted primarily as possible limitations of using NLI as an external validation tool. 

(1) Reported speech and accusations treated as entailment. A recurring failure mode is that Dataset LLM Pipeline label mean pent mean pneu mean pcon entail_rate                                                                         

> COPA GPT-4o mini Factual 0.921 0.074 0.005 0.968 COPA GPT-4o mini Deducible 0.730 0.236 0.034 0.750 COPA GPT-4o mini Wrong 0.507 0.481 0.012 0.429 COPA Mistral Large 2 Factual 0.920 0.070 0.010 0.941 COPA Mistral Large 2 Deducible 0.396 0.557 0.047 0.366 COPA Mistral Large 2 Wrong 0.074 0.889 0.038 0.000 SocialIQA GPT-4o mini Factual 0.852 0.102 0.046 0.905 SocialIQA GPT-4o mini Deducible 0.759 0.238 0.003 0.813 SocialIQA GPT-4o mini Wrong 0.431 0.560 0.009 0.333 SocialIQA Mistral Large 2 Factual 0.759 0.134 0.107 0.733 SocialIQA Mistral Large 2 Deducible 0.349 0.648 0.003 0.167 SocialIQA Mistral Large 2 Wrong 0.236 0.494 0.270 0.200

Table 8: Check 2. NLI probabilities grouped by the pipeline (LLM-side) label (F ACTUAL /D EDUCIBLE /W RONG ).                                                          

> Dataset LLM Group mean pent mean pneu mean pcon entail_rate
> COPA GPT-4o mini A0.628 0.369 0.003 0.500 COPA GPT-4o mini B0.604 0.335 0.062 0.750 COPA Mistral Large 2 A0.082 0.913 0.005 0.000 COPA Mistral Large 2 B0.245 0.732 0.023 0.190 SocialIQA GPT-4o mini A0.431 0.560 0.009 0.333 SocialIQA GPT-4o mini B0.740 0.239 0.021 0.857 SocialIQA Mistral Large 2 A0.236 0.494 0.270 0.200 SocialIQA Mistral Large 2 B0.060 0.098 0.842 0.000

Table 9: Check 3. Disagreement analysis in discarded triplets. Group A = human non-W RONG but model discarded. Group B = human W RONG but model kept. 

both the LLM pipeline and the NLI probe often treat a speech act or an accusation as a factual claim. In SocialIQA, the context “Robin knew that Kai really wanted her to like her outfit so when Kai asked her opinion, Robin said she loved it” reports what Robin said , not what she truly believed. Nevertheless, the hypotheses “Robin loves outfit” and “Robin likes outfit” are consid-ered factual by the LLM and also receive high pent 

from the NLI model, even though the text does not imply that Robin genuinely loves/likes the outfit (hence the human W RONG label). Similarly, in COPA the context “The sales associate accused the girl of stealing” does not entail that the girl stole, yet the hypothesis “girl steals” , which is WRONG according to humans, is labeled factual by the LLM and judged as entailed by NLI. Overall, these examples show that linguistic commitment (said/accused/believed) is easily conflated with fac-tuality by both NLI and LLMs, warranting cautious use of NLI as a diagnostic tool for IIE. 

(2) Temporal non-realization treated as entail-ment. Hypotheses that incorrectly assume an an-ticipated or otherwise non-factual event is realized can still be labeled as entailed by NLI. For instance, in the context “The man anticipated cold weather on his trip” , NLI assigns high entailment to hy-potheses that assume realization ( e.g. , “Man expe-riences cold weather” ). This is somewhat similar to the speech/accusation pattern discussed in the paragraph above in that both blur possibility and factuality, but it is also conceptually distinct as the source of non-entailment here is temporality and uncertainty ( i.e. , the text describes the possibility of an event in the future but does not imply its realization). 

(3) Ill-formed and underspecified triplets with lexical overlap biasing towards high entail-ment. When the LLM-side pipeline produces triplets that are partially ill-formed or underspec-ified ( e.g. , missing necessary arguments or awk-ward predicate-object structures), humans tend to label them as W RONG . On the other hand, NLI often becomes overly sensitive to shallow lexical cues and yield high entailment, effectively match-ing on wording overlap even when the sentence is meaningless. For instance, the verbalization derived from (bar, isAt, <none>) is incom-plete (“Bar is at”) yet it receives high entailment. Similarly, triplets like (teammates, interact, blame) can lead to syntactically degraded hypothe-ses that nonetheless attract entailment due to over-lap with the premise about teammates and blame .Overall, these cases warn against a possible self-reinforcing failure mode where upstream extrac-tion can generate low-quality triplets, and NLI may over-reward surface overlap when the hypothesis is not semantically well formed. 

(4) Discourse structure misread as contradiction. 

Another recurring failure mode is that the NLI model sometimes mishandles concessive discourse markers ( e.g. , even though ), treating the clause they introduce as if it were being denied rather than merely contrasted with what follows. A concrete example appears in SocialIQA with the factual triplet (Jesse, hasToDo, homework) extracted from the context “Even though she had homework to do that night, Jesse helped Skylar study” Hu-mans label (Jesse, hasToDo, homework) as FACTUAL because the sentence explicitly states that Jesse had homework. However, the presence of the concessive frame (“Even though . . . , Jesse helped . . . ”) can confuse NLI, resulting in a high contradiction score, as if the second clause (helping Skylar) somehow negates the first (having home-work to do). In addition, this example of failure may be exacerbated by a confusion between an obli-gation ( having homework to do ) and actually doing 

the homework (a realized event), which could push the model toward the contradiction judgment. 

A.4 Takeaways 

(1) Across datasets and LLMs, F ACTUAL triplets receive consistently high entailment scores, sug-gesting that the NLI model tends to agree with humans and LLM on factual triplets. (2) D EDUCIBLE triplets systematically shift proba-bility toward neutral relative to F ACTUAL , which is expected as many commonsense inferences are plausible but not licensed by strict textual entail-ment. (3) Grouping by the pipeline (LLM-side) label (Check 2) yields the expected ordering (F ACTUAL 

> DEDUCIBLE > WRONG ) in terms of entailment probability and suggests that many discard deci-sions correlate with lower NLI support. (4) The main instability arises for WRONG 

triplets. Especially for triplets that were labeled as W RONG by humans, NLI often assigns high entailment under well-known patterns such as speech/accusations treated as facts, temporal non-realization, and shallow lexical matching in ill-formed hypotheses (Section A.3). This reinforces that NLI is useful here as a diagnostic probe, not as a replacement for human judgment. (5) Disagreement cases (Check 3) are largely a concentrated source of ambiguity. Compared to Checks 1 and 2 they often produce lower confi-dence NLI outputs and do not reliably align with either humans or the pipeline, making them best suited for targeted qualitative inspection rather than aggregate conclusions. 

B Prompts 

Entity Extraction 

Given a piece of text, extract all relevant entities mentioned in it. Ensure each extracted entity is unique and distinct: if two entities with the same name are mentioned, specify additional information that allows them to be identified unambiguously. Otherwise, entity names need to be as succinct as possible: a single noun suffices, so avoid mentioning attributes or other information if it is not necessary for disambiguation purposes. Additionally, associate a tag to each entity indicating the entity type, choosing among the following: <per>, a distinct person or set of people; <ani>, a distinct animal or set of animals; <org>, an organization characterized by a formally established association (e.g., businesses, sports teams, music groups, government units, educational institutions); <gpe>, a geographical, social, or political entity, including continents, nations, counties, districts, states, provinces, and cities; <fac>, a facility, building or piece of infrastructure, such as a house, factory, gym, museum, office building, parking garage, airport, train station, etc.; <obj>, any man-made object, artifact, or structure that does not fall under the facility category; <occ>, an occupation in the sense of a role, job, position held by one or more people; <tim>, a reference to a time or duration; <num>, a reference to a number, either as an absolute value or with a unit of measure; <msc>, any other entity that does not fall under the categories above. Be as concise as possible and provide an answer in the form entity1 <type1>; entity2 <type2>; ... Example 1: Text: Cameron decided to have a barbecue and gathered her friends together. Entities: Cameron <per>; barbecue <msc>; friends <per> Example 2: Text: Seth has become a huge fan of Queen ever since Anna suggested he listen to them. Entities: Seth <per>; Queen <org>; Anna <per> Example 3: Text: Max parked his car right where Susan usually parks hers. Entities: Max <per>; Susan <per>; Max’s car <obj>; Susan’s car <obj> Text: [context sentence] Entities: 

Relationship Extraction - Explicit 

Given a piece of text and a list of entities mentioned in it, extract relational triplets in the form of (Subject, Relation, Object) from them, based on what is expressed in the text. Paraphrasing is encouraged to include general relations that could be applied to other similar situations, but it should not be used if it would result in an excessive loss of specificity. This should mainly be applied to common situations, and it should be avoided if the given text mentions a highly specific circumstance. The relation of each triplet must be expressed in the present tense, regardless of how it was worded in the text. The triplets must not contain information related to timing, for instance, the starting time of an event or its duration. The subjects and objects of each triplet should strictly be selected from the list of entities, unless one of the following occurs: if the text conveys information that can be represented as a unary relation without an object, use <none> as the object; if the text mentions an entity having an attribute or a quality, use the attribute in question as the object. Furthermore, in the following cases a subordinate sentence should be used as the object: - Events that introduce a reference to a possible world --e.g., Mary wanted John to buy some wine -> (Mary, wants, (John, buys, wine)). - Verbs that introduce an entailment (or presupposition) of the argument’s veracity -- e.g., Mary regrets that she didn’t marry John -> (Mary, regrets, (Mary, doesNotMarry, John)). - Events that introduce a presupposition about the non-veracity of the argument -- e.g., Lina forgot she had to buy flowers -> (Lina, forgets, (Lina, hasToBuy, flowers)). - Events that fall into the categories of reporting and perception -- e.g., Tim saw Ron crossing the street -> (Tim, sees, (Ron, crosses, street)). - Reporting and perception events with negative polarity --e.g., Sue denied she ate the cake -> (Sue, denies, (Sue, eats, cake)). - Events introduced by negative particles -- e.g., Greg didn’t want to go home -> (Greg, doesNotWant, (Greg, goes, home)). - Events accompanied by an aspectual verb -- e.g., Jody stopped talking -> (Jody, stops, (Jody, talks, <none>)). If one of these applies, the subordinate sentence should first be extracted as a relational triplet, maintaining a credible structure with a subject, a relation, and an object by changing the exact wording from the text where needed. This triplet should then be used as the object. Notice that this structure can be applied recursively, and the object triplet itself could have another triplet as its object. Additionally, for each relational triplet, extract a reference to the part of the text where the relation is mentioned or hinted to. Simply repeat the relevant snippet between `` ,copying it from the given text. Select the shortest possible snippet that contains the relation. Be as concise as possible and provide an answer in the following form: [(sub1, rel1, obj1) `... `; (sub2, rel2, obj2) 

`... `; ...]. Example 1: Text: Jesse was pet sitting for Addison, so Jesse came to Addison’s house and walked their dog. Entities: [Jesse, Addison, house, dog] Triplets: [(Jesse, petSittingFor, Addison) `Jesse was pet sitting for Addison `; (Jesse, goesTo, house) `Jesse came to Addison’s house `; (Jesse, walks, dog) `walked their dog `;(Addison, owns, dog) `their dog `]Example 2: Text: Kai lost Austin’s phone yesterday morning and felt terrible at losing such a valuable item. Entities: [Kai, Austin, phone] Triplets: [(Kai, loses, phone) `Kai lost Austin’s phone `,(Austin, owns, phone) `Austin’s phone `, (Kai, feels, terrible) 

`felt terrible `, (phone, hasAttribute, valuable) `such a valuable item `]Example 3: Text: Lewis mentioned he would have liked to be a musician as a kid. Entities: [Lewis, musician] Triplets: [(Lewis, mentions, (Lewis, wouldLike, (Lewis, isA, musician))) `Lewis mentioned he would have liked to be a musician `]Example 4: Text: Mona just wanted to sleep after a grueling shift at the hospital. Entities: [Mona, shift, hospital] Triplets: [(Mona, wants, (Mona, sleeps, <none>)) `Mona just wanted to sleep `, (shift, isAt, hospital) `shift at the hospital `, (shift, hasAttribute, grueling) `grueling shift `]Text: [context sentence] Entities: [extracted entities] Triplets: 

Relationship Extraction - Implicit 

Given a piece of text and a list of entities mentioned in it, list additional facts that can be deduced or inferred from the text. These must be compatible with and derived from the provided text, even though they are not explicitly stated in the text. List as many facts as can possibly be derived; avoiding false positives is not the main concern. The facts can include, but should not be limited to, the following: the subject’s intent in performing the specified action; the subject’s or the object’s reaction to the event, emotional or otherwise; the events likely to precede or follow the specified action, such as necessary pre-conditions or subsequent effects; the qualities that can be attributed to the subject or the object based on the event. Represent these facts as relational triplets in the form of (Subject, Relation, Object). The relation of each triplet must be expressed in the present tense, regardless of how it was worded in the text. The triplets must not contain information related to timing, for instance, the starting time of an event or its duration. Avoid unnecessary repetitions; triplets in the list must not be duplicates of other triplets. If the subject and/or the object of a triplet is an entity present in the provided list, its name has to be reported verbatim. If the text conveys information that can be represented as a unary relation without an object, use <none> as the object. If the text mentions an entity having an attribute or a quality, use the attribute in question as the object. Lastly, the object can also be a nested triplet to allow for more expressiveness, such as in the following cases: - Events that introduce a reference to a possible world --e.g., (Mary, wants, (John, buys, wine)). - Verbs that introduce an entailment (or presupposition) of the argument’s veracity -- e.g., (Mary, regrets, (Mary, doesNotMarry, John)). - Events that introduce a presupposition about the non-veracity of the argument -- e.g., (Lina, forgets, (Lina, hasToBuy, flowers)). - Events that fall into the categories of reporting and perception -- e.g., (Tim, sees, (Ron, crosses, street)). - Reporting and perception events with negative polarity --e.g., (Sue, denies, (Sue, eats, cake)). - Events introduced by negative particles -- e.g., (Greg, doesNotWant, (Greg, goes, home)). - Events accompanied by an aspectual verb -- e.g., (Jody, stops, (Jody, talks, <none>)). In any other case, it is crucial that the object is a credible entity. Ideally, it should be a single word, but it can include more if needed. Be as concise as possible and provide an answer in the following form: [(sub1, rel1, obj1); (sub2, rel2, obj2); ...]. Example 1: Text: Jesse was pet sitting for Addison, so Jesse came to Addison’s house and walked their dog. Entities: [Jesse, Addison, house, dog] Triplets: [(Addison, livesIn, house), (Addison, trusts, Jesse), (dog, isAt, house), (dog, wants, (dog, goesOut, <none>))] Example 2: Text: Bailey was babysitting a child for the weekend. Bailey took him to church. Entities: [Bailey, child, weekend, church] Triplets: [(Bailey, likes, children), (Bailey, is, religious), (Bailey, attends, church), (Bailey, babysits, <none>)] Example 3: Text: Bernie was studying, but then he was interrupted by an incoming call. Entities: [Bernie, call] Triplets: [(Bernie, caresAbout, studying), (Bernie, stops, (Bernie, studies, <none>)), (Bernie, answers, call)] Text: [context sentence] Entities: [extracted entities] Triplets: 

Inference Challenge 

You are given a piece of text and a relational triplet in the form (Subject, Relation, Object). The triplet was inferred or derived from the given text, but it is not explicitly mentioned in it. Without being excessively strict, specify whether or not the triplet can be reasonably deduced from the text: if not, add a brief explanation of the reason (maximum 20 words). If the triplet is not precisely indicated or mentioned in the text, that does not automatically disqualify it from being a reasonable deduction or inference; however, the information the text provides should be a solid enough premise for the conclusion that is the inferred triplet. Note that the triplet might not strictly need a premise from the text to be a valid and reasonable inference. Simply answer “yes” or “no; <explanation>”. Do not produce an explanation if the answer is “yes”. The first word of the answer must be either “yes” or “no”. If present, the explanation must be succinct and strictly related to the given triplet; it must not exceed 20 words. Do not include anything other than the “yes”/“no” and the short explanation. Example 1: Text: Jesse was pet sitting for Addison, so Jesse came to Addison’s house and walked their dog. Inference: (Jesse, takesCareOf, dog) CanBeInferred: yes Example 2: Text: Leah and Fawn have been classmates for 5 years. Inference: (Leah, isFriendOf, Fawn) CanBeInferred: no; being classmates does not necessarily imply friendship. Example 3: Text: Quinn was having a talk with their significant other. Quinn poured her heart out. Inference: (Quinn, wants, (significant other, understands, Quinn)) CanBeInferred: yes Example 4: Text: Alex called the school immediately to make a complaint with the principal. Inference: (Alex, expects, (principal, solves, (Alex, has, complaint))) CanBeInferred: no; Alex speaking to the principal does not mean he expects them to solve his complaint. Text: [context sentence] Inference: [implicit triplet to analyze] CanBeInferred: 

Inference Correction 

You are given a piece of text, a relational triplet in the form (Subject, Relation, Object), and a brief explanation. The triplet was deduced from the given text, but it is not explicitly mentioned in it; however, the inference was deemed wrong for the reasons clarified in the explanation. Considering the explanation provided, apply a correction to the given triplet to eliminate the reason why the original triplet was discarded and ensure that the corrected triplet can actually be inferred from the text. The correction should address the problematic aspects of the original triplet, as highlighted in the explanation, without excessively modifying it. If it is not possible to correct the issues highlighted by the explanation, do not force a correction and simply answer “none”. Be as concise as possible. If it is possible to apply a correction, provide only the corrected triplet in the form (Subject, Relation, Object); else, simply answer “none”. Example 1: Text: Jesse was pet sitting for Addison, so Jesse came to Addison’s house and walked their dog. Inference: (Addison, owns, house) Explanation: The text does not imply that Addison is the legal owner of the house. Correction: (Addison, livesIn, house) Example 2: Text: Leah and Fawn have been classmates for 5 years Inference: (Leah, isClassmateOf, Fawn) Explanation: Being classmates does not necessarily imply friendship. Correction: none Example 3: Text: Alex called the school immediately to make a complaint with the principal. Inference: (Alex, expects, (principal, solves, (Alex, has, complaint))) Explanation: Alex speaking to the principal does not mean he expects them to solve his complaint. Correction: (Alex, expects, (principal, listensTo, complaint)) Text: [context sentence] Inference: [implicit triplet to correct] Explanation: [reason for discarding the triplet] Correction: 

Inference Explanation 

You are given a piece of text, an inferred relational triplet, and a list of relational triplets explicitly mentioned in the text. The inferred triplet was derived from the given text, but it is not explicitly mentioned in it. All triplets are in the form (Subject, Relation, Object). Specify which of the explicit relationships (if any) can be used as a premise to explain or derive the inferred triplet. Be as concise as possible and provide an answer in the following form: [(sub1, rel1, obj1); (sub2, rel2, obj2); ...]. Example 1: Text: Jesse was pet sitting for Addison, so Jesse came to Addison’s house and walked their dog. Inference: (dog, isAt, house) Relationships: [(Jesse, petSittingFor, Addison), (Jesse, cameTo, house), (Jesse, walked, dog), (Addison, owns, dog)] Premise: [(Jesse, petSittingFor, Addison), (Jesse, cameTo, house)] Example 2: Text: Quinn was having a talk with their significant other. Quinn poured their heart out. Inference: (Quinn, wants, (significant other, understands, Quinn)) Relationships: [(Quinn, talksTo, significant other), (Quinn, poursOut, heart), (heart, belongsTo, Quinn)] Premise: [(Quinn, talksTo, significant other), (Quinn, poursOut, heart)] Example 3: Text: Jan bought a cat at the pet store and brought it home with them. Inference: (cat, needs, (cat, drinks, water)) Relationships: [(Jan, buys, cat), (Jan, bringsTo, home), (cat, isAt, pet store)] Premise: [] Text: [context sentence] Inference: [implicit triplet to explain] Relationships: [extracted explicit relationships] Premise: 

Duplicate Removal 

You are given a piece of text, a list of relational triplets in the form [(sub1, rel1, obj1), (sub2, rel2, obj2), ...] and a candidate triplet (subject, relation, object). The list contains triplets that represent information expressed in the text. Determine whether or not the candidate triplet is a duplicate of those in the list, that is, if it expresses the same information as a triplet in the list, whether the two use the exact same wording or a semantically equivalent phrasing. Be as concise as possible. Simply answer “yes” if the candidate triplet is a duplicate, “no” otherwise. No punctuation. Text: [context sentence] Triplets: [extracted relationships] Candidate: [implicit triplet to analyze] IsDuplicate: 

Event/State Detection and Temporal Grounding 

You are given a piece of text and a list of relational triplets [(sub1, rel1, obj1); (sub2, rel2, obj2); ...]. For each relational triplet, determine whether it represents an event or a state in the given context. An event is a situation that happens or occurs; an event can be punctual, or it can last for a period of time. A state is a condition or a circumstance that holds true; it can be constant throughout the text, or it can change. Additionally, for each triplet extract an absolute temporal reference if the text provides it. Such a reference anchors the event to a specific moment in time, such as a day, a year, an hour. References relative to other events should be disregarded. Report the temporal reference between `` .Triplets might not have a temporal reference, in which case the answer should simply be `none `.Be as concise as possible. Provide an answer by repeating the triplets verbatim, in the same order they were given, and associating each of them to either an <event> tag or a <state> tag and a temporal reference (or `none `), in the form [(sub1, rel1, obj1) <...> `... `; (sub2, rel2, obj2) <...> `... `; ...] Example 1: Text: Jesse was pet sitting for Addison, so Jesse came to Addison’s house and walked their dog. Triplets: [(Jesse, petSitsFor, Addison); (Jesse, goesTo, house); (Jesse, walks, dog); (Addison, trusts, Jesse); (Jesse, likes, dogs)] Tags: [(Jesse, petSitsFor, Addison) <event> `none `; (Jesse, goesTo, house) <event> `none `; (Jesse, walks, dog) <event> 

`none `; (Addison, trusts, Jesse) <state> `none `; (Jesse, likes, dogs) <state> `none `]Example 2: Text: Aubrey tried and got Kendall to go to the dance recital next Wednesday at the town square. Triplets: [(Aubrey, invites, Kendall); (Kendall, attends, recital); (recital, locatedAt, town square)] Tags: [(Aubrey, invites, Kendall) <event> `none `; (Kendall, attends, recital) <event> `next Wednesday `; (recital, locatedAt, town square) <state> `none `]Text: [context sentence] Triplets: [extracted relationships] Tags: 

Temporal Relation Extraction 

You are given a piece of text and a list of pairs of relational triplets in the form [((s1, r1, o1), (s2, r2, o2)); ((s3, r3, o3); (s4, r4, o4)); ...]. Based on the text, derive the relative temporal relationship between each pair of triplets by marking it with a tag: <before> if the first triplet of the pair occurs before the second; <after> if the first triplet of the pair occurs after the second; <while> if the first and the second triplet occur simultaneously; <none> if no defined temporal relationship between the two triplets can be derived from the text. Provide an answer by repeating the pairs of triplets in the same order they were given and associating each of them to their temporal relation tag. Answer in the form [((s1, r1, o1), (s2, r2, o2)) -> ...; ((s3, r3, o3); (s4, r4, o4)) -> ...; ...]. Be as concise and brief as possible and avoid answering with anything other than the triplet pairs and the tags. Example 1: Text: Jesse was pet sitting for Addison, so Jesse came to Addison’s house and walked their dog. Triplet pairs: [((Jesse, petSittingFor, Addison), (Jesse, cameTo, house)), ((Jesse, petSittingFor, Addison), (Jesse, walked, dog)), ((Jesse, cameTo, house), (Jesse, petSittingFor, Addison)), ((Jesse, cameTo, house), (Jesse, walked, dog)), ((Jesse, walked, dog), (Jesse, petSittingFor, Addison)), ((Jesse, walked, dog), (Jesse, cameTo, house))] Tags: [((Jesse, petSittingFor, Addison), (Jesse, cameTo, house)) -> <while>, ((Jesse, petSittingFor, Addison), (Jesse, walked, dog)) -> <while>, ((Jesse, cameTo, house), (Jesse, petSittingFor, Addison)) -> <while>, ((Jesse, cameTo, house), (Jesse, walked, dog)) -> <before>, ((Jesse, walked, dog), (Jesse, petSittingFor, Addison)) -> <while>, ((Jesse, walked, dog), (Jesse, cameTo, house)) -> <after>] Example 2: Text: Cameron decided to have a barbecue and gathered her friends together. Triplet pairs: [((Cameron, hosted, barbecue), (Cameron, gathered, friends)), ((Cameron, gathered, friends), (Cameron, hosted, barbecue))] Tags: [((Cameron, hosted, barbecue), (Cameron, gathered, friends)) -> <after>, ((Cameron, gathered, friends), (Cameron, hosted, barbecue)) -> <before>] Text: [context sentence] Triplet pairs: [pairs of extracted triplets] Tags: 

Figure 5: Relation type proportions for the temporal relationships extracted by models and humans. C Additional Results 

Inference Correction 

> Figure 6: Human sentiment regarding discarded triplets in open answers for SocialIQA, grouped by model and multiple choice answer.

Fig. 6 reports human sentiment splits concerning discarded triplets as a function of the model gen-erating the triplets as well as the answer choice expressing how strongly the evaluators agree with the decision to discard the triplet. Table 10, instead, details the results of the evaluation regarding the inference correction review section. 

Timing Information 

Fig. 5 reports the relation type proportions for temporal relationships extracted by both models as well as humans. 

Human Consensus 

Figures 7, 8, and 9 show the cluster of human re-spondents for SocialIQA questions in triplet clas-sification, inference correction review, and model error correction, respectively. Tables 11, 12, and 13, on the other hand, report the cluster-wise aggre-gated metrics referring to each of the clusters. 

> Figure 7: Clusters of respondents for the triplet classi-fication task with markers highlighting the position of the two models.
> Figure 8: Clusters of respondents for the inference cor-rection review task.

SocialIQA COPA Sub-task Metric Mistral GPT Mistral GPT 

Model-Human Agreement 9 / 12 (75.0%) 5 / 10 (50.0%) 12 / 12 (100%) 8 / 9 (88.9%) 

Fully agree absolute majority rate 7 / 12 (58.3%) 4 / 10 (40.0%) 11 / 12 (91.7%) 6 / 9 (66.7%) 

Disagree absolute majority rate 0 / 12 (0%) 5 / 10 (50.0%) 0 / 12 (0%) 1 / 9 (11.1%) Average polarity 63.1% 45.6% 87.6% 68.4% Average Fully agree proportion 49.9% 35.6% 79.4% 55.6% Discard Average Disagree proportion 23.8% 44.4% 4.2% 18.7% Model-Human Agreement 12 / 12 (100%) 8 / 10 (80.0%) 12 / 12 (100%) 8 / 9 (88.9%) Reason Average polarity 86.3% 76.4% 92.1% 78.0% Model-Human Agreement 10 / 12 (83.3%) 10 / 10 (100%) 12 / 12 (100%) 8 / 9 (88.9%) Correction Average polarity 80.5% 77.6% 89.8% 70.0% 

Table 10: Detailed results for the inference correction review section.                                       

> Metric Cl. 1 Cl. 2 Cl. 3 Cl. 4 Cl. 5 Cl. 6 Average
> Factual proportion 39.2% 38.7% 57.2% 32.2% 46.2% 35.2% 42.2% Deducible proportion 38.3% 24.8% 21.8% 43.4% 31.6% 39.1% 33.0% Wrong proportion 22.5% 36.5% 20.9% 24.3% 22.2% 25.7% 24.8%
> Majority agreement rate 92.5% 76.3% 89.0% 83.2% 81.2% 67.7% 83.2%

Table 11: Cluster-wise aggregated metrics for triplet classification. 

Figure 9: Clusters of respondents for the model error correction task. Metric Cl. 1 Cl. 2 Cl. 3 Cl. 4 Cl. 5 Average 

Fully agree proportion 44.0% 84.9% 26.0% 0.0% 62.1% 56.2% Somewhat agree proportion 6.2% 3.6% 39.9% 2.6% 24.5% 15.7% Disagree proportion 49.8% 11.6% 34.2% 97.4% 13.3% 28.1% 

Majority agreement rate 62.6% 83.8% 39.3% 34.6% 64.0% 65.1% 

Open answer count 3.64 1.30 5.83 3.31 3.53 3.21 

Average open answer length 107.7 61.4 110.9 124.0 92.5 90.8 

Table 12: Cluster-wise aggregated metrics for inference correction review. 

Metric Cl. 1 Cl. 2 Cl. 3 Cl. 4 Cl. 5 Average 

Triplet discard rate 34.0% 31.1% 32.7% 25.4% 39.2% 31.7% 

Majority agreement rate 87.3% 91.3% 87.1% 93.2% 79.4% 88.7% 

Average addition length 6.03 36.61 83.30 4.59 18.09 17.29 

Table 13: Cluster-wise aggregated metrics for model error correction.