Title: Multimodal Data Comprehension: Understanding How Visual-Textual Chains of Information Influence Data Interpretation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.23489v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Jul 2026 00:56:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
© 2026 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.202x.xxxxxxx/ 

# Multimodal Data Comprehension: Understanding How Visual-Textual Chains of Information Influence Data Interpretation 

## Arran Zeyu Wang, Fuling Sun, and Danielle Albers Szafir 

Figure 1: We investigate how the order of presented information influences people’s analytical comprehension over and engagement with data. The study design compares two sequential information chains: a Visualization-First Chain (top row) and a Text-First Chain (bottom row). Participants viewed these chains and provided open-ended summaries of the data after each step in the chain (pink text). We found the different chains led to distinct patterns in data comprehension. (a) The visualization-first chain facilitates an exploratory comprehension , where users move from observing a visual pattern to understanding its cause. (b) In contrast, the text-first chain creates a strong framing effect, leading to a confirmatory comprehension where the visualization is used to find evidence for the initial textual narrative. This difference illustrates how chains of information can be used to either encourage discovery or guide an audience to a specific conclusion. 

Abstract — Visualizations and text often work together to support effective data communication. Despite this common paradigm, we know little about how the interplay of these modalities affects people’s data comprehension. We present a novel experimental paradigm to investigate multimodal data comprehension —the process of people comprehending information from multimodal visual and textual data—across both crowdsourced and think-aloud environments. Our methodology employs two sequential chains for presenting multimodal information—a visualization-first chain and a text-first chain—asking people to describe the data presented iteratively. By comparing how people’s data comprehension changes across the chain, we can assess the information contribution of each modality and how they shape subsequent comprehension. We found that the visualization-first chain facilitates exploratory comprehension with hypothesis-driven discovery, whereas the text-first chain yields confirmatory comprehension akin to framing effects where visualizations serve to reinforce and confirm observations drawn from text. Our findings provide empirical insights into multimodal information integration, with implications for designing more effective data-driven communication. 

Index Terms —Data comprehension, narrative visualization, framing effect, priming, cognition, multimodal, communication 

1 INTRODUCTION 

From academic papers to public-facing dashboards, visualizations are relied upon to efficiently convey information and translate complex data into actionable insights [23, 25, 54]. However, in practice, visual-izations are rarely consumed in isolation. Instead, they are frequently used as part of a multimodal presentation, combined with text (e.g., a news article [51]), imagery (e.g., a data comic [8]), or audio (e.g., a documentary or oral presentation [15]). Such context, often pro-vided through captions, titles, or surrounding narrative text, plays an essential role in guiding interpretation and shaping the reader’s com-

• Arran Zeyu Wang and Danielle Albers Szafir are with the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. E-mail: zeyuwang, danielle.szafir@cs.unc.edu • Fuling Sun is with the University of California, San Diego. E-mail: fusun@ucsd.edu Manuscript received xx xxx. 202x; accepted xx xxx. 202x. Date of Publication xx xxx. 202x; date of current version xx xxx. 202x. For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier: xx.xxxx/TVCG.202x.xxxxxxx 

prehension [49, 54, 56]. However, the critical interplay between text and visuals is poorly understood—visualization research often examines charts in isola-tion [27]. Graphical perception and related studies characterize ef-fectiveness largely based on visual design, failing to consider textual context [20, 62, 74]. Prior work has explored the impact of text on how people read visualizations, but primarily focused on simple, de-scriptive information, like titles, annotations, or standalone statistics and statements [12, 34, 39, 56, 57]. However, these techniques may be essentially re-explaining the chart, often providing information people could have inferred directly from the visualizations [40, 49, 63]. In real world contexts like news articles [4], text serves a richer narrative function, providing context, externalized knowledge, and expert opin-ion that is not immediately visible in the chart itself. We lack insight into how rich multimodal information in real-world communication shapes data comprehension (see Figure 1 for examples). In this work, we investigate how people comprehend data across visual and textual information under such conditions. A key factor that may impact the interplay between text and visu-alizations in data communication is the order in which information is 1arXiv:2607.23489v1 [cs.HC] 26 Jul 2026 consumed. In many common daily usage scenarios, people consume information sequentially, scanning their attention from text to visual-ization or visualization to text. Imagine reading a news article about climate change: if you see a shocking graph of rising temperatures first, you may likely feel alarmed and engage with the data to hypothe-size about the cause of the drastic change before reading the text for explanations. Conversely, reading a fearful headline first, "Climate disaster imminent...", may lead you to see the same graph merely as proof of that disaster, not as a source for exploration or investigation. In other words, you may be primed to look at data as evidence for a specific conclusion rather than as a means for exploration and critical engagement. This difference would mean the order in which you re-ceive the information can change how you comprehend the same data. Seeing the visualization first may cause you to engage with and actively process the data, attending to and interpreting different patterns using sensemaking processes, whereas text first may prime you to directly search for confirmatory evidence. The order of information delivery can commonly change in the real world. For example, if you read a news article or paper from a website or mobile phone, it is common to see teaser images first, but if you receive a breaking news alert first through your email or listen to a podcast when driving, text becomes lead modality and the information chain is reversed. Other factors, such as the exact article or paper layout and seeing text summaries ahead of graphics in an LLM response, may likewise shift the order of information. We investigate the role of order in multimodal data communication through a novel bidirectional experimental paradigm investigating how the order of visual and textual information shapes people’s evolving understanding of data. We examined two fundamental chains of visual and textual information common in real-world data communication. In the visualization-first chain (Figure 1 (a)), participants first view a data visualization and write an initial comprehension reflecting their understanding of the data, then receive text information and report their revised comprehension. In the text-first chain (Figure 1 (b)), this order is reversed: participants see the textual information first, followed by the visualization. By assessing initial and revised comprehensions within and between these chains, we can empirically assess information transmission across modalities and changes in comprehension provided by each modality. We applied this approach using visual graphics and stories from The New York Times [4] which contains rich visual and textual information written and designed by professional journalists. We selected stimuli consisting of multiple paragraphs of article text with accompanying vi-sualizations and assessed participant’s comprehensions with two chains in both crowdsourced ( N = 60 ) and in-person think-aloud ( N = 8) en-vironments. Our results provide empirical insights into the unique and complementary roles of visual and textual information in sensemaking (Figure 1). Notably, in the visualization-first chain, people’s compre-hension initially describes a diverse set of observations, visual patterns, and hypotheses, exhibiting exploratory behavior and using the text to refine and reason causally about their observations. In the text-first chain, people start with a clear, unified, but also restricted understand-ing of the text and engage in confirmatory behaviors when encountering the visualization. Seeing subsequent charts has little impact on their expressed data comprehension as the visualization becomes supporting evidence that the text is “correct.” Our findings provide a framework for understanding how people comprehend multimodal data with differ-ent chains of information and suggest implications for more effective and intuitive multimodal communication approaches. Our work moves beyond seeing text as a supplemental annotation or label, treating it as an equal partner in the construction of knowledge in visualized data [27] and revealing how this partnership can shape data sensemaking. The main contributions of this paper include: • A methodology for empirically studying multimodal information integration in data comprehension. • Empirical evidence that the chains of information in multimodal data affect comprehension, creating two distinct behaviors: ei-ther clarifying and extending initial explorations ( exploratory 

comprehension) or making a prior understanding more concrete (confirmatory comprehension). • Our findings offer actionable guidance for designers on how to organize visual and textual information to optimize data commu-nication to either encourage open discovery or ensure accurate and efficient comprehension. 

2 BACKGROUND 

Our work draws conceptual inspiration from information theory and cognitive science and builds upon research in data storytelling, visual comprehension, and text-based communication. 

2.1 Effective Visual Communication: Storytelling with Data 

Beyond purely analytical tasks, visualizations are often used for data storytelling [23]. Effective storytelling designs thoughtfully direct a reader’s attention through a narrative [33]. The rhetoric [29] and the presentation order of visualizations [30] influence the reader’s inter-pretation of a data story. Visual narrative flows, such as visuals and navigation feedback, help control the order in which people encounter different visualizations to influence people’s understanding and engage-ment in a story [42]. These works highlight that data communication and storytelling involve complex design processes to optimize across a space of design guidelines and heuristics to get the desired communica-tion performance. Modern news media and journalism often draw on visual story-telling theories and best practices to create articles and reports [36, 70]. Visualization research has suggested different practices to help peo-ple architect data stories, such as leveraging narrative guides like 

Freytag’s Pyramid [81], supporting automated linking of text and charts [60], or conceptualizing frameworks for crafting non-traditional storyflows [8, 18, 26]. Much of this past work focuses on mechanisms for designing and implementing stories; however, the structure of a data story can impact the reader’s experience as well. Segel & Heer [54] identified common narrative structures used in journalistic and explana-tory visualizations, such as the martini glass structure [14] that first presents an author-driven narrative and then allows for reader-driven exploration. Zhi et al. [82] suggest that the structure of a story may influence comprehension and engagement. These studies investigated how different genres of story structure influence interpretation; how-ever, they lack insight into more granular components of story design, including how knowledge evolves over the course of a story or across modalities and how that evolution may shape readers’ information foraging behavior. We probe the progress happened across commu-nication modalities in data stories by assessing how its two primary components—visuals and words—work together to shape people’s understanding of data. 

2.2 High Level Data Visualization Comprehension 

Research has long studied how visualizations support insight into data (see Quadri & Rosen [48] and Battle & Ottley [10] for surveys). Semi-nal work in visualization perception and cognitive science established the foundations for understanding how people decode visual encodings and identify patterns [20] and introduced frameworks for how people reason with data [53]. This research has informed design principles for effective visualization, from selecting appropriate chart types [76] to using color [61], shape [64], and redundancy [65]. Most recently, empirical and theoretical research in visualiza-tion comprehension has evolved from studying low-level percep-tual tasks [7] like value estimation to understanding cognitive psy-chology processes [74], including complex information comprehen-sion [11, 49, 71], cognitive biases [39, 73], and decision making [31, 45]. For example, existing work found people often extract gist level infor-mation rather than specific point values from bar and line graphs [55]. People’s high-level comprehension of a visualization is frequently mis-aligned with designer’s objectives [49] and is influenced by their prior beliefs and expectations [32]. Even the same data representation can yield different mental models and understandings [11, 71, 78]. These studies typically examine visualizations in isolation. Yet, in many common real-world contexts, visualizations are accompanied by 2© 2026 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.202x.xxxxxxx/ 

text, annotations, and other complementary modalities that enrich the data to support comprehension and sensemaking. Further, people attend to information and build knowledge from that information sequentially, even within a singular visualization. Elements of this context, such as external emphasis [80], may shape the order in which people attend to different information. While frameworks like sensemaking [47] can model the high-level process of reasoning with visualizations, we have little insight into how knowledge is constructed from visualizations in richer contexts where data is often presented across different modalities and how comprehension evolves across modalities and over time. 

2.3 The Role of Text in Visualization Communication 

Visualizations are rarely consumed in isolation, they are also accompa-nied by other content, such as video, audio, animation, and text. Studies examining the effects of such multimodal content have investigated the text scaffolding explaining information shown within the chart itself, exploring how titles, labels, and annotations affect chart reading speed, recall, and accuracy. For instance, a descriptive title can help prime people to identify key insights more quickly [75], but a misaligned one may increase bias [35] and cause incorrect recall [34]. Well-crafted annotations improve memorability [13], recall [12], and uncertainty interpretation and reasoning [50], and may also influence bias and data-driven predictions [56]. Integrating information-rich captions with charts can significantly enhance people’s ability to accurately interpret information and clarify ambiguities [57]. These studies indicate that text is important for narrative construc-tion and sensemaking. However, they predominantly treat text as a secondary component, an aid to help interpret the primary visual pre-sentations. In practice, text often serves as the predominant means for communicating data, with visualizations augmenting the text-based content of a narrative rather than serving as the primary mechanism for information delivery [54, 58]. Hearst argues for treating language as co-equal to visualization in research [27], noting a variety of ways in which text and visualization may interact. We build on this perspective, treating text not as an augmentation in service of a visualization but as an independent source of information that works directly with visual-izations and other data communication modalities. These modalities are then processed by cognitive systems to help people reason over and comprehend data. Our approach aims to explore the behaviors resulting from this process. 

2.4 Sequential Information Processing of Cognition 

People typically do not process information at random: we attend to information sequentially, and the order of exposure matters [24]. Our treatment of data and text as information chains is inspired by classical communication paradigms that illustrate how information can be gained or lost in a sequential process [22, 37]. First formally discussed by Lashley as priming [37], further foundational work from Kahneman & Tversky in cognitive psychology has established strong theoretical basis for sequential phenomena—the framing effect [67], where initial stimuli influence the response to subsequent stimuli, and the anchoring and adjustment heuristic , where an initial piece of information serves as an anchor that biases future judgments [66]. Such sequential paradigms have been used to study information propagation and the fidelity of message transfer in human groups [38, 59, 69]. These effects exist in visualizations as well. Experiments demon-strate that seeing a scatterplot with different visual patterns will change people’s perception of class separability in the next scatterplot [68]. Further, priming and anchoring effects affect how people characterize clustering in multiview scatterplots [83]. Established beliefs about data can change people’s estimation of correlation [79] and causality [71] for the same visualization with different labels. Several factors, such as a person’s locus of control, may impact people’s susceptibility to anchoring and priming in visualization [6]. Framing effects and se-quentially adding and omitting information from visualizations were found to impact to people’s interpretation in the context of narrative visualizations [29, 30]. In more complex visual analytics contexts, the order and magnitude of information shown in the analytics pipeline can influence decision making [19] and people’s analytical focus during exploration [84]. However, established studies on framing and anchoring effects in visualization focus largely on exploratory analytical pathways and the effect one visualization has on another without considering complemen-tary modalities. Our study adapts sequential information presentation methodologies in a two-stage format to understand how comprehen-sion evolves in sequence depending on the order in which different modalities are delivered. 

3 METHODOLOGY 

To understand the influence of information order on data comprehen-sion in multimodal comprehension, we introduce a paradigm centered on multimodal communication chains. This approach allows us to capture and compare a reader’s evolving understanding of data across modalities of information. The study was approved by [Redacted] Institutional Review Boards. 

3.1 Materials and Stimuli 

We tested comprehension using 12 stimuli sourced directly from sto-ries published by The New York Times [4] that used multimodal data presentations. We chose this source for its high ecological validity, as the materials were created by expert journalists and visual design-ers for a broad audience following established best practices for news media [44]. Each stimulus consisted of a data visualization and its accompanying multi-paragraph text article. We manually reviewed 181 news articles including visual graphics published from 2020 to 2024 (see Table 3 for a summary), and selected 12 graphics that research team agreed covered a diverse range of daily visualization usage scenarios, contained sufficient visual and textual information to draw meaningful insight from each modality independently, and were not too complex for lay readers. Stimuli consisted of one visualization and two to three paragraphs from each article communicating messages related to the core ideas in the associated visualization, with word counts ranging from 80 to 147 words from 12 news articles. We then further reduced the corpus to select visualizations reflecting the information density, diversity, and authenticity of stimuli found in real-world data communication. We assigned labels of chart type and topic (e.g., energy, framing, health, etc.) for each visual graphic, and applied five selection criteria to choose the final 12 stimuli to ensure familiarity, clarity, representation, neutral attribution, and topic diversity. See Table 1 for the distribution of selected visualizations and Figure 1 and Section 4 for example stimuli. Please see Appendix A for additional details on stimulus curation, including the selection criteria, process, visualizations, and topics, as well as all stimuli (Appendix E).           

> Table 1: Stimulus Visualization Type Distribution
> Types Map Line Chart Bar Chart Area Chart Scatterplot Counts 33321

3.2 Study Design 

We employed a within-subjects design where the primary independent variable was the Information Presentation Order . This variable had two levels, one for each communication chain: 

The Visualization-First Chain : Participants were first shown the visu-alization in isolation and were then presented with the accompanying text (Figure 1 (a)). 

The Text-First Chain : Participants first read the paragraphs in isolation and were then shown the corresponding visualization (Figure 1 (b)). We conducted the study across both crowdsourced and in-person par-ticipants. The crowdsourced participants allowed access to a larger and more diverse sample population [21], while the in-person participants allowed us to directly observe participants’ analytical behavior through thinkaloud methods and provided greater control over data quality. We captured participants’ data comprehension after each step in the chain, using open-ended free-form text descriptions for crowdsourced participants or thinkaloud verbal responses for in-person participants. 3For the crowdsourced experiment, each participant was randomly assigned 4 of the 12 stimuli: two using the visualization-first chain and two using the text-first chain, with the mapping of the communication chain and stimuli counterbalanced between participants. We counterbal-anced chains and stimuli across participants and randomized the order in which people saw each of the four trials to mitigate potential transfer effects. To prevent learning effects from specific visual encodings, we also ensured that no participant saw the same chart type more than once across their four trials, and no participant saw the same stimuli in both a visualization-first and text-first chain. Completing only four stimuli helped avoid fatigue effects that can degrade data quality in crowdsourced studies [28]. We opted to include all twelve stimuli in our samples to increase stimulus diversity and help account for individual variation between participants in our final dataset. For the think-aloud experiment, each participant completed all 12 stimuli. Given the nature of in-person studies, twelve stimuli proved manageable without significant fatigue or other transfer effects in pilot-ing. Similar to the crowdsourced study, each participant evaluated six stimuli using the visualization-first chain and six stimuli using the text-first chain, with the order of the twelve stimuli and mapping between stimuli and chains both randomized. During the study, participants were encouraged to think-aloud to help capture behaviors not acces-sible in crowdsourced studies (e.g., reasoning processes or affective responses). 

3.3 Procedure 

The overall procedure was the same for both populations. Participants began the study by first providing informed consent and reading brief instructions summarizing the experimental task. Participants then com-pleted a brief demographic questionnaire and entered the formal study. Participants saw the sampled trials (four for crowdsourced and twelve for in-person) in a random order. For each trial, participants first saw the first modality in the chain and provide their initial compre-hension of the data based on this modality. They then advanced to the second modality and provided a revised comprehension. This process proceeded for each chain as follows: Visualization-First Chains: 

Initial Comprehension : The participant was shown only the data visualization and prompted: “ Based on this chart, please describe your comprehension of this data. ”

Revised Comprehension : After submitting their initial description, participants were shown the accompanying text without the image and asked to provide an updated response: “ Combining the above para-graphs and the previous chart, please describe your comprehension of this data. ”Text-First Chains: 

Initial Comprehension : The participant was shown only the text of the article and prompted: “ Based on the above paragraphs, please describe your comprehension of this data. ”

Revised Comprehension : After submitting their response, they were shown the corresponding visualization without the text and asked to provide a revised description: “ Combining the above chart and the previous paragraphs, please describe your comprehension of this data. ”Crowdsourced participants provided their comprehensions using a text box, while in-person participants were encouraged to verbalize their reasoning processes as they constructed the comprehensions and then provide a verbal summary comprehension. This process was repeated for all assigned stimuli. After completing the formal trials, all participants were asked to describe their comprehension strategies when the data was presented in the two different chains and their overall experience during the study. Crowdsourced participants provided these responses through a textbox while in-person participants provided responses in a semi-structured interview. 

3.4 Participants 

We recruited crowdsourced participants from Prolific [46]. All partici-pants had normal vision or corrected-to-normal vision, and provided informed consent before beginning the study. Three engagement checks were randomly placed among the questions (e.g., select the answer of 17 plus 3). If a person selected the wrong answer, the study was termi-nated and a new participant was recruited. 60 qualified participants (36 male, 23 female, one non-binary) were involved in the crowdsourced study. Among them, each participant took an average of 21 minutes 14 seconds to complete the study. In-person participants were recruited through mailing lists, professional networks, community outreach, and snowball sampling. Eight users were involved in the study (four male, four female). All participants had at least a university degree and self-reported some familiarity with visualization. The thinkaloud study took about 1 hour. Our study has 14 responses per stimulus/condition on average, fitting the common sample size in HCI research [16]. 

3.5 Data Collection & Analysis 

The primary data collected from the experiment were the text descrip-tions provided by the participants from both studies. In total, we collected 480 comprehension descriptions (60 participants × 4 stim-uli × 2 comprehensions per stimulus) from crowdsourced study and 192 descriptions (8 participants × 12 stimuli × 2 comprehensions per stimulus) from thinkaloud study. We analyzed the data using thematic analysis. Two coders collec-tively identified, discussed, and categorized codes using an inductive approach and summarized the main themes from the resulting codes. Coders met regularly throughout the process to assess agreement and refine the codebook accordingly. Discrepancies were discussed until consensus was reached. Each coder individually coded half of the corpus plus 40 overlapping responses selected at random to verify in-terrater reliability. We computed Cohen’s kappa k = 0.85 , indicating excellent reliability [41]. We extracted themes from the coded com-prehensions, with an emphasis on observed comprehension patterns emerging between initial and revised comprehensions (i.e., exploratory comprehension and confirmatory comprehension ) that reflect the change in comprehension from information ordering. Please see Ap-pendix D for the detailed codebook. These codes and analysis procedures enabled us to comprehensively capture critical patterns in people’s comprehension and allow a global comparison between their comprehension across modality, chain direc-tion, and stimulus. Our discussion of results focuses on the primary findings from our analysis. 

4 FINDINGS 

We found that how people comprehend multimodal data is driven by the chain of information presentation. The order in which a reader consumes visual and textual information not only changes their final conclusions from the data, but may alter their sensemaking process. We observed two distinct patterns of comprehension correlated with pre-sentation order: exploratory comprehension in the visualization-first chain (Section 4.1) and confirmatory comprehension in the text-first chain (Section 4.2). We additionally synthesized a cognitive framework of how people consume data across different multimodal information chains based on patterns in the coded data (Section 4.3). Participant quotes from the crowdsourced experiment are denoted by a randomly assigned an ID from P1 to P60 . We use P to indicate participant counts (e.g., 60/60 P) and R forresponse counts (e.g., 120/120 R). 

4.1 Visualization-First Chain: From Visual Exploration to Narrative Reasoning 

When participants viewed the visualization first, their comprehension process was characterized by an exploratory and evidence-driven ap-proach. Their initial descriptions of the data began with concrete visual patterns while the text enabled a richer contextualized understanding embodied in the revised comprehensions as explained hypotheses and causal reasoning. 

4.1.1 Initial Comprehension (Visualization Only): Diverse Pattern-Seeking and Hypothesis Generation 

Viewing data with only the visual representations, participants’ re-sponses provide evidence of active exploration. Their initial descrip-4© 2026 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.202x.xxxxxxx/ 

> Figure 2: The visual graphic of US Temperature Record [1].

tions mainly focused on salient statistical visual features (101/120 R), such as areas/ranges, trends, outliers/extremes, clusters, and other pat-terns. For example, after seeing the stimulus of US Temperature Record (see Figure 2), most participants reported visual statistical features (9/10 P). P2 noted, “ The chart shows that U.S. weather stations have consistently broken more heat records over the past three decades... ”describing a continuous trend and situated that trend within the chart’s context. P10 expressed a similar comprehension for the same map, stating that “ Weather is changing, most new records are recording as hotter than previous records continuously. ” This emphasis on different statistics aligns with past studies on visualization comprehension that found people comprehend a range of different statistical quantities in visualized data [49]. Crucially, this visual exploration was often coupled with spontaneous hypothesis generation (67/120 R). Without textual context, participants actively speculated on the underlying causes of the patterns they ob-served, often posing their thoughts as questions. In the US Temperature example above, P3’s comprehension preliminarily relied on an assump-tion that the trends observed were periodic: “ temperature records go back and forth ... in almost a cycle like pattern . In a chart describing farming and underground water in Kansas (see Figure 3), half of the participants observed a potentially causal correlation: “ As water levels fall so does corn yield... ” [ P25 ], describing how falling water impacts declining corn yields. Descriptions were sometimes also filled with un-certain but curious language. For example, two also primarily described the correlation pattern between water and corn, but reflected a more uncertain conclusion of “ indirect correlation ” that is “ not completely conclusive ” [ P24 ]. This pattern of digging into uncertain yet causal reasoning reflects an experience of curiosity and a desire to understand the meaning behind the information presented by the chart. The same visual graphic can lead to a range of diverse comprehen-sions that focus on different patterns, further reflecting visualization’s power to elicit different understandings [11, 49], on average, one visual graphic can lead to three to four types of different focuses in people’s interpretations. In the US Temperature Record example (Figure 2), participants reported five different statistical patterns, and no single pattern was universally described across all participants. For example, rather than focusing on overall patterns like P3 ’s periodic observations described above (also noted by 4 of 10 participants), some participants (3/10 P) observed an extreme pattern at a peak point of temperature in the chart, referencing that specific statistic in their comprehension as in “the number of temperature records that were broken in 2021... ” [ P4]. Others (2/10 P) read both the highest and lowest extremes to interpret the data aggregated by year, as “ in 2021 ... all-time temperature records ... The highest number of all-time cold temperatures was in 1994. ”[P7]. The Farming and Underground Water example (Figure 3) shows similar variance in the patterns people use to describe data. Rather than emphasize correlations (5/10 P) like P24 and P25 above, others (3/10 

> Figure 3: The visual graphic of Farming and Underground Water in Kansas [2].

P) focused on an unusual change of the data pattern from two different time periods, such as, “Even though water levels dropped from 1960 to 1980, corn yields doubled. But, beginning in the year 2000, as wa-ter levels dropped, corn yields also dropped significantly ”[P27]. On the other hand, P29 interpreted the visualization with a focus on temporal patterns on how things change with specific notions of value ranges, “In 1960, the water level was around -100 feet below land surface and as the years progressed, it fell. In 1980 for instance, it had fallen to -130 feet below land surface and then got to -180 feet below land surface in 2020. ” [ P29]. These observations indicate that people draw a diverse array of conclu-sions even from the same chart. Of note, this diversity occurs despite the fact that the tested visualizations were typically designed to com-municate one specific pattern in the data to support the source article’s narrative. 

4.1.2 Revised Comprehension (Visualization + Text): Hypothe-ses Validation, Causal Reasoning, and “ Aha ” Moment 

Viewing the text after the visualization led to comprehensions that synthesized observations across patterns and imbued additional mean-ing into the visualizations. Participants (91/120 R) commonly used the textual narrative to explicitly validate their discoveries, confirm or correct their initial hypotheses, and generate causal inferences, adding qualitative and contextual information derived from the text. For exam-ple, after seeing the textual information of the US Temperature Record (Figure 2), many participants (6/10 P) included language validating their previous findings or hypotheses. P2 , who had previously reported a monotonic trend of temperature, further confirmed this finding in their revised description and added more nuance to their initial observations, “...the text explains the depth and reliability of the data...From both sources, it becomes evident that all-time records are a yearly occurrence, but the scale and intensity vary... ” [ P2]. Similarly, P10 confirmed the “ likely ” pattern from their initial compre-hension (cyclic behavior) and extended the their conclusions based on causal observations to make predictions based on the combined infor-mation, explaining that “ our climate is changing and going towards much warmer weather. ”This revision process often involved a targeted re-examination of the visualization, where people would use causal inferences drawn from the text to further reason about their chart-based comprehension. In the Farming and Underground Water example, 7 of 10 participants exhibited this behavior Figure 3). P25 , who initially described the data as showing a correlation between water and corn yields, revised their initial purely statistical description to use firmer and more precise causal language: “ The water being so scarce is causing fields to dry out 

5and corn cannot produce [sic] in these conditions. ” The final revised comprehension represented a grounded, causal narrative, using the textual story to form a high-level takeaway to explain the statistical evidence drawn from the visualization. While the above examples contextualized individual patterns, text was also used to create causal hypotheses about the relationship between multiple patterns. For example, P26 connected two disjoint patterns from their original interpretation of the Farming example using context from the text: “ This text provides context to explain the relationship between the two charts. From 1960-2000, corn yields increased because farmers were draining the aquifer. After 2000, they only relied on rain, which decreased yields. ”. As seen above, seeing the text after the visualization often introduced causal reasoning into participants’ descriptions. This delayed reason-ing about cause may help participants mitigate the risk of potential false discovery in visualization-only comprehension. In some instances (31/120 R), participants formed initial interpretations from visualiza-tions that hypothesized about causality, yet explicitly noted how these hypotheses may be incorrect. For example, after carefully examining the textual data for Farming and Underground Water (Figure 3), some found they might have focused too narrowly on the relation between farming and underground water in the chart, and corrected their incon-clusive comprehension about the correlation between water levels and corn yields: “ It seems like the chart was showing the results of dryland farming, rather than comparing the water decline to the results of the crops. ” [ P24 ]. Such correction demonstrates that text can help resolve previous uncertainty or even false discovery from visual information: the participant conceptualized their observations as a sort of testable question or hypothesis to “ testing my last idea ” [ P17 ] and used the text to fill in the gaps that led to that thought. Further, we observed an Aha! moment—a moment of visible, pos-itive knowledge construction and engagement—at least once for all thinkaloud participants when they encountered the text after the visu-alization. When the text explained an observation or hypothesis they had generated from the visual patterns, sometimes participants showed clear behavioral differences, such as heightened posture, responsive facial expression, and verbal exclamations—all of them (8/8 P) literally said “ Aha! ” at least once. Due to space constraints, examples from in-person participants are available in Appendix B. When the visualizations show an obvious pattern like a change or outlier that can be easily captured in comparison, people are more likely to hypothesize a reason behind them. In such cases, the text, especially when it provides externalized easy-to-understand reasons that do not appear in the charts’ annotations, can help people make more sense of the data, lending context for deeper reasoning and preventing false discovery or conclusions. However, when the chart is more complex, as in a distorted area chart (e.g., Figure 9), or the additional contextual information is well-known (e.g., global warming, Figure 13), these moments are less likely to arise: we found no evidence of any such “Aha!” behaviors in the two charts. 

Summary : Examining the differences between initial and revised com-prehension, people seeing the visualization-first chain in multimodal communication exhibit exploratory comprehension , starting from dis-covery and data-oriented hypothesizing with the visualization and using the text to guide more precise and extended reasoning and inference. People initially identified a diverse set of possible descriptions, keeping their language largely focused on the data and statistical patterns and expressing uncertainty when engaging in deeper reasoning. The text caused people to become more certain and integrate additional infor-mation, including causal reasoning and extending the described data to include additional patterns and observations. These extensions and movement towards rich, causal descriptions and “Aha!” moments of insight development reflect a hypothesis-driven process where people enable the data to lead their discovery process and use the text to assess and refine the resulting hypotheses. 

> Figure 4: The visual graphic of Average Baseball Game Length [5].
> Figure 5: The visual graphic of California Electricity Power [3].

4.2 Text-First Chain: From Narrative Framing to Visual Confirmation 

In contrast to the visualization-first chain, participants who read the text first exhibited a top-down and narrative-driven reasoning process. The text established a strong frame that guided precise and focused comprehension, but also constrained their subsequent interpretation of the visualization. Visualizations in the revised descriptions primarily served to confirm people’s understanding of the data rather than offering new insight or observations. 

4.2.1 Initial Comprehension (Text Only): Establishing a Narra-tive Anchor 

When presented with only the text, participants’ descriptions were sum-maries of the text’s key claims and arguments (120/120). Their initial description speaks to reasoning as processing a predefined narrative rather than deeper engagement with the data. This process created a strong mental anchor and a clear set of expectations for what the accompanying visualization would depict. As P1 wrote after reading paragraphs about Average Baseball Game Length (see Figure 4), “ Baseball games are now as short as they were in the 1980s, due to rule changes. ” All participants (10/10 P) exhibited little variation, solely focusing on describing the rule changes, despite the volume of text presented. For example, P4 noted “ Rule changes are switching baseball game times back to like they were in the 1980’s. ”Similarly, all descriptions (10/10 P) of California Electricity Power (see Figure 5) focused on the increasing construction of batteries to store California’s solar power for usage at night. For example, “ California built large batteries to store solar energy captured during the day so that people are still able to use... ” [ P13]. Unlike the visualization-first chain, where these two visualizations generated uncertain and varied hypotheses, in the text-first condition, people appear to engage in passive information reception, with the text serving as an anchor [66], building anticipation to see the “ proof ” for the story they had just read in the visualization. This tended to manifest 6© 2026 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.202x.xxxxxxx/ 

in the responses as a focus on high-level conceptual arguments rather than specific aspects or statistical patterns in the data. 

4.2.2 Revised Comprehension (Text + Visualization): Reinforc-ing the Predetermined Frame 

Upon seeing the visualization, people overwhelmingly tended to exhibit confirmatory behavior. The chart was not viewed as a new source of information to be explored, but as evidence to validate the internalized narrative from the text. Unlike in the visualization-first chain, where descriptions tended to expand and exhibit additional reasoning, adding additional information through the visualization in the text-first chain had little influence on participant comprehension despite offering more potential perspectives on the data. While 40% of the participants added contextual information such as visual patterns or values to better justify the claim, 60% retained the same primary claim from their original comprehension. No descriptions challenged the underlying claims of the original text or revised their original understanding. Unlike the visualization-first chain, where many participants pre-sented multiple hypotheses or patterns of interest, text-first participants tended to retain a singular focus in their responses (98/120 R). For example, in the Average Baseball Game Length stimulus (Figure 4), all participants (10/10 P) retained their focus merely on the rules. P1 em-ployed almost the same frame from their original comprehension noted above: “ Baseball games are about as short as they were in the 1980s. Rule changes have shortened the games relative to where they were in the 1990s up until recently. ”. Sometimes participants (2/10 P) added contextual information, like historically how the game length changes. For example, P4, who initially noted that the rules had brought game lengths closer to times from the 1980s, revised their comprehension with an observation about the overall historical trend from visualization, noting “ Baseball game lengths have historically been getting longer over time. ” before the new rules. We observed similar patterns in other examples. In California Elec-tricity Power (Figure 5), all participants (10/10 P) again reported similar comprehension, focusing on batteries and time of day. For example, 

P13 kept the main descriptions in their original comprehension de-scribed above: “ The batteries California installed make it possible for people to continue using clean energy even after the sun goes down... ”[P13 ]. P15 added context of how much population was impacted by this battery action, “ an additional 1/5 of the population are using stored energy from batteries... ” but still focused on the same data patterns from their initial comprehension. Overall, the text acted as a form of perceptual filtering and framing: people tended to use visualizations as evidence of the core hypotheses from the text, but these representations led to little to no change to the overall description of the data. Participants in this condition were significantly less likely to notice or comment on salient visual patterns— such as secondary trends, extremes, or outliers—if those features were not explicitly mentioned in the text, e.g., 69 visualization-first chain participants reported secondary patterns while only 22 in text-first chain reported secondary patterns, exhibiting a sort of framing effect [67]. Their strategy was one of feature-matching, treating the visualization like a checklist to find evidence for the text’s claims and integrating specific data from the visualization to refine the claims. Consequently, the visualization was relegated to the role of an illustration, a graphical restatement of the text, rather than a tool for independent discovery and deeper inquiry. As a result, people viewing multimodal data through a text-first chain were more likely to exhibit a confirmatory comprehen-sion behavior, with knowledge being heavily constrained by the initial information in the text. The behavior observed in the text-first chain during the thinkaloud participants additionally demonstrated this confirmatory approach. A common behavior, either stated explicitly or implied through their reasoning, among all participants was to use the visualization to simply say, “ That (text) is correct. ” Please see Appendix B for more examples from in-person participants. 

Summary : Participants’ strategies in the text-first chain reflected a sim-ple approach of using visualizations to find visual evidence supporting the story they had already been told. This behavior indicates that the text-first chain induces a strong framing effect leading to confirmatory comprehension, where the primary cognitive activity is matching visual patterns to a predefined textual narrative. 

4.3 A Framework of Multimodal Data Comprehension 

We can characterize the two chains of information in multimodal data comprehension using the observed differences among four features: cognitive process, primary activity, role of visualization, and outcome, as shown in Table 2. We elaborate on this characterization with quotes from the comprehension results and reasoning strategies employed in both chains, illustrating how the chains of information shape the process of multimodal comprehension. The way we present multimodal data changes how people engage with and develop knowledge through data. The visualization-first chain consistently fostered an exploratory and hypothesis-driven process as 

exploratory comprehension . People acted like detectives, exhibit-ing a bottom-up reasoning process: forming initial hypotheses from visual evidence and then using the text to test and refine these hypothe-ses, gaining precision and integrating contextual information when presented with text (left part in Table 2). On the contrary, data com-prehension from the text-first chain revealed a powerful framing effect to produce a top-down reasoning process: where the text established a narrative that people then sought to confirm with the visualization, changing their language but having little substantive impact on the information content of their comprehension (right part in Table 2). This 

confirmatory comprehension led to an evidence-matching process rather than open-ended exploration, with people seeking to “fact-check” the observations gained from text. Please see Appendix C for a more detailed discussion on operationalizing this framework. 

4.4 Textual Cues within Visualizations 

While our chain model divides text and visualizations into indepen-dent modalities, visualizations typically contain some amount of func-tional text (e.g., annotations, axis labels, titles, highlighted values) that can effect on people’s understanding of data as seen in prior work [34, 39, 73, 79]. Annotations specifically direct the reader’s atten-tion to particular values, as seen in the Baseball example. We addition-ally examined the results from stimuli with and without annotations in the visualization-first chain to explore this affect. Participants exposed to visualizations with clear textual cues in the visualization-first chain still engaged in a more exploratory process than those who read text first. The textual cues acted as signposts within the data landscape, pointing out specific features, but they did not establish a full causal narrative or a rich contextual frame. Participants did not universally include the annotated patterns in their responses, including the anno-tated patterns slightly more often in visualizations with annotations than without. For example, “ ...temperature records...2021 ” was anno-tated in Figure 2, but more than half of participants (6/10) reported a different pattern or additional patterns. Some generated their own hypotheses about the annotated pattern, and some focused on other data patterns, such as “ 1994 may be the coldest year ” [ P16 ], “ temperature records go back and forth ” [ P3 ], and “ cold temp records also appear in 2021 ” [ P9 ]. The annotation in the Baseball Game stimuli (Figure 4, noting where the numbers went “ back to 1980s levels ” led to 6 of 10 participants reporting this same pattern in the visualization-first chain, while presenting the same information in the text of the text-first chain led all participants to report the pattern. That annotations did not fully constrain comprehension indicates a potential priming gradient: full textual narratives create the strongest framing effect, directing the reader’s entire approach to the data. Smaller textual cues, like visual annotations, provide a milder and more localized form of guidance, influencing which data features are attended to but not necessarily precluding broader exploration. In our study, a clear visual annotation primed 40%-60% of participants to converge at a similar comprehension, while text primed nearly all read-ers towards a particular pattern in the corresponding visualizations. Embedding textual cues in visualizations can enhance clarity without fully sacrificing the benefits of exploratory comprehension, whereas 7Table 2: A Framework for Chains of Information in Multimodal Data Comprehension 

Feature Visualization-First Chain Text-First Chain 

Summary Exploratory comprehension Confirmatory comprehension 

Cognitive Process Bottom-Up: From evidence to conclusion Top-Down: Framed understanding 

Primary Activity Hypothesis generation & reasoning Narrative understanding & reinforcement 

Role of Visualization A tool for discovery An illustration for the text 

Outcome A synthesized multimodal understanding A text-dominated scope-limited understanding leading with a full paragraph of text is a more powerful tool for guiding the audience toward a specific interpretation. 

5 DISCUSSION 

We examined how information chains in multimodal communication influence people’s data comprehension. The simple act of presenting a visualization before or after its accompanying text creates two dif-ferent cognitive behaviors. Presenting the visualization first fosters a bottom-up and exploratory sensemaking process, where people form hypotheses from visual evidence. In contrast, presenting the text first creates a top-down confirmatory process, where a powerful framing effect guides and constrains the reader’s interpretation of the visualized data. 

5.1 Theoretical Implications 

Our work provides empirical evidence connecting long-standing the-ories in cognitive science and guidelines of narrative visualizations within the context of multimodal data communication. The behavior exhibited in the text-first chain reflects priming [37] and framing ef-fects [67]. The initial text acts as a strong prime (to strongly convey a piece of information related to the data), establishing a narrative frame (reader understands this piece as the underlying message before seeing charts) that anchors the reader’s expectations. This framing effect has downstream consequences for how people make sense of the presented information. For example, people may become subject to potential confirmation bias [77], seeking out visual evidence that supports the predefined narrative while overlooking other information, especially information that may be ambiguous, unrelated, or even contradictory. They may overemphasize patterns associated with the text, as in the Curse of Knowledge [80] or even override or falsely interpret contradictory observations in the data, as with mislead-ing titles [34] or strong beliefs about presented variables [71]. This framing effect also limits engagement and agency: people limit their interaction with the data to confirming the claims provided in the text at the cost of exploring their own, more diverse impressions of the data. In contrast, the visualization-first chain tends to promote greater agency, reducing framing effects at the cost of potentially greater upfront uncertainty. Despite being designed to communicate points aligned with the text descriptions, participants expressed a wider ar-ray of statistical observations in the visualization-first chain. Their strategies reflect this discovery-first process as well, noting the free-dom and flexibility the visualization allows when presented before the accompanying text. This result confirms recent observations that the conclusions we draw from data may vary, even for relatively simple or familiar visualizations [11, 49, 78]. However, this agency comes at the cost of increased cognitive effort on the part of the reader and potential misalignment between the objectives of the chart and what readers learn from it. Further, visualization-first chains can be regarded as a simpler everyday version of visual data exploration. The visualization acts as a lightweight exploratory interface: people first engage in pattern-seeking and hypothesis generation from the visual evidence alone, a classic exploratory activity [9, 10, 25]. The subsequent text then functions as a key step in the sensemaking loop, providing the context and causality needed to validate, refine, or correct those data-driven hypotheses, like guidance in visual data exploration [17, 43, 72]. Viewed collectively, our findings add a critical layer to data com-prehension research, which has traditionally focused on interpreting charts in isolation. Adding additional context can further shape the information that people extract from visualizations, whether as part of exploratory knowledge formation in the visualization-first chain or confirmatory behaviors in the text-first chain. The insights people extract from a visualization are not static but are highly malleable and subject to the influence of preceding information [10]. This malleabil-ity emphasizes the importance of assessing data interpretation across modalities, echoing Hearst’s call for a co-equal treatment of text and graphics [27]. Furthermore, these findings provide a mechanistic explanation for the widely-applied narrative structures in visual data storytelling identi-fied by Segel & Heer [54]. The author-driven narrative paths, where a story is explicitly laid out for the reader, function similarly to our text-first chain by establishing a controlled frame that the visuals then serve to illustrate. Conversely, the initial exploratory phase of our visualization-first chain reflects a likely reader-driven exploratory path they describe, allowing people to first distribute attention on their own to comprehend visualized data, then the corresponding insights are refined through engagement with the complementary text modality. We show that these information chains form a primary tool authors can use to shift between these narrative modes, either guiding readers toward a specific conclusion or inviting them into open-ended discovery. 

5.2 Guidelines Across Data Communication Goals 

The differences between exploratory comprehension and confirmatory comprehension, observed in the two chains of information, have im-portant practical implications for creating or consuming data-driven content. Our findings are not prescriptive but rather descriptive, urging creators to be intentional about their design choices. To encourage exploration, discovery, and agency , consider design-ing communications that lead with the visualization. For example, one might put the chart at the top of an article, use it as the opening slide or view in a slideshow or scrollytelling story, or leverage visual salience to strongly pull the reader’s attention to the graphic. This approach is ideal for any use cases that need people to first engage deeply with the data, such as guiding readers through a range of analytical questions, open-ended data features, or situations where the goal is to empower the audience to draw their own conclusions before being presented with a narrative. Designing for the visualization-first chain conceptually invites readers into a process of inquiry and subsequent dialog with the author through the ensuing text. To communicate a specific and intentional message and ensure it is received as intended, consider leading with text. Text-first leverages the power of framing to focus people’s attention on what matters most in the data. This approach may be useful in cases where a communica-tion is intended for persuasion or for communicating complex concepts, such as explaining scientific phenomena to a lay audience. However, this power comes with significant ethical responsibility. Creators must be aware that this choice minimizes the likelihood of alternative inter-pretations and should ensure their frame is a faithful representation of the data to avoid ethical issues, such as perpetuating incorrect or biased information [52]. Alternatively, they may choose to use visual annota-tions to reduce the priming power while still offering active direction towards critical elements of the data. The results also indicate a need for data literacy curricula to better address multimodal contexts. As a complement to assessing and teach-ing how effectively people can read a chart in isolation, approaches can teach how to recognize and critically assess the influence of text accompanying a chart. Developing proactive awareness may encourage deeper critical reflection in the text-first chain and potentially help mitigate the reduced analytical agency engendered by such designs in the future. 8© 2026 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.202x.xxxxxxx/ 

5.3 Format vs. Amount of Information in Real-World Design (In)Coherence Across Modalities 

Our stimuli used a typical real-world multimodal data format (news articles) instead of fully-controlled visualizations designed for research purposes. A critical consideration from this approach is the inherent division of labor in authoring news media, where articles are typically developed by small teams. Journalists typically author the text and visual designers or graphics editors create the accompanying charts. This separation of roles could have direct implications for the coherence between the modalities. The text used in our study, while directly related to the visuals, was typically authored to function as a coherent part of the broader article. Unlike alternative texts or captions that only describe visualiza-tions [40, 85], they provide narrative context, contextualized explana-tions, and real-world significance that extend beyond the visualizations’ immediate purview. In contrast, the visualizations may be designed to illustrate and support the specific narratives presented in the text. The visualizations we employ are, by nature, not typically intended to be fully stand-alone artifacts but rather potent illustrations within a specific textual context. Therefore, the text fragments we tested may not be representative of the full breadth of statistical details present in the text. This asymmetry in design intent is a common case of real-world mul-timodal communication—the interaction between text and visualization aims to enhance communication and data comprehension [27]. In the text-first chain, this coherence works as intended: the text establishes a narrative frame tailored for the visualization to then illustrate and concretize. This therefore leads to the powerful confirmatory compre-hension we observed, as people only focus on part of the visualization that fits into the space prepared for it by the text. However, in the visualization-first chain, we see alternative compre-hensions arising from a visualization, even though the visualization was designed for a specific narrative. Participants lacked the scaffold-ing of the narrative framing that the article intended to convey. This, instead, allowed them engage in an exploratory comprehension process, generating their own diverse hypotheses and patterns, some of which aligned with the article’s intended narrative and others which did not, resulting in a broader range of insight and greater reliance on their own agency to make sense of the data. It is worth noting that comprehension may also be shaped by the underlying design intent and the degree to which each modality is optimized to function independently versus as an integrated unit. Some data stories intend the visualization to carry the weight of the narrative. Further, visualizations tend to carry more statistical information than text within the same amount of visual space. This asymmetry accurately reflects real-world data journalism: text typically offers a more focused message, but lacks context. However, this also introduces an inherent confound between the delivery modality and the amount of information provided. Future work should decouple these factors by testing conditions with absolute information parity— for instance, comparing visualization chains against an alternative text condition that systematically enumerates every data trend in pure prose. 

5.4 Limitations and Future Directions 

Our work explores multimodal data comprehension of visual and textual information. While this experiment offers preliminary insight into how chains of information can influence data interpretation, it also raises new opportunities to understand how alternative approaches to multimodal communication can shape data comprehension. 

5.4.1 Beyond Sequential Viewing 

While our sequential model divides presentation order into two simple opposing chains, real-world visualization consumption may not behave as cleanly. Beyond linear sequential viewing, people can dynamically alternate between visuals and text when both modalities are presented simultaneously, actively moving their attention back and forth between a textual passage and an accompanying data visualization to incre-mentally piece together a unified understanding. However, attention is inherently a sequential process, and we typically see visualizations in the media designed to support consumption of either text first or images first. Future research should explore how alternating attention influences interpretation and how different designs might encourage different attentional behaviors. Based on our findings, we hypothesize that this alternation behavior may manifest as a continuous loop of cross-modal verification. When a reader’s primary attention is anchored in the textual narrative, they treat the visualization as a localized reference point to locate the correspond-ing visual feature from the text. Conversely, a reader might use the visualization as an exploratory map, identifying an unexpected spike, dip, or cluster, and then scan the nearby text to find an explanation or causal mechanism that accounts for that visual anomaly, especially if an image is used as a teaser or made particularly salient by design. While our chains of information model treats text and visualizations as sequential blocks of information, real-world media often relies on charts that tightly blend these modalities dynamically, such as data comics and interactive scrollytelling. These designs may force people to rapidly switch focus between reading words and decoding charts. Future research should investigate how sequential viewing behavior operates in these hybridized formats. 

5.4.2 LLM-Lead Information Delivery 

Real-world information chains are increasingly being reshaped by as-sistive technologies such as LLMs, which frequently generate textual summaries or interpretations before a user interacts with the original visual graphics. This shift potentially places users more commonly in a text-first chain, which our study shows leads to a using visualizations for confirmatory rather than exploratory behavior. Future research should empirically measure the trade-offs between the efficiency of LLM-generated summaries and the cognitive biases they may introduce. Text-first chains established a narrative anchor that led people to engage in a confirmatory behavior rather than open-ended discovery. In the context of LLMs, this framing effect could signifi-cantly amplify susceptibility to AI hallucinations and loss of human analytical agency, raising the importance of understanding how the order of information delivery when designing exploratory AI assistants. 

5.4.3 Other Considerations 

Our crowdsourced sample represents a general audience and corre-sponding literacy level. Future work should systematically assess how visualization literacy influences people’s behavior in multimodel comprehension. Individuals with lower graph literacy may be more vulnerable to the strong framing effects observed in the text-first chain. While we found no notable differences across self-reported visualiza-tion familiarity, people with substantive experience working with data might approach data differently and lead to different behaviors than those observed in our study. Our study additionally tested information-rich communicative graph-ics. When a visualization is inherently rich and complex, it demands higher cognitive effort, which may naturally trigger a state of ex-ploratory behavior in the visualization-first chain. However, this dy-namic might look different for very simple bar charts or single-line graphs whose entire message can be gleaned in a brief glance. For trivial charts, two chains may collapse into a uniform comprehension. Future work should investigate the relation between complexity and comprehension behavior. 

6 CONCLUSION 

Real-world data communication frequently combines visualizations and text. Our research demonstrates that the interplay between these two modalities is profoundly influenced by a simple variable: which one speaks first. By introducing and validating the paradigm of chains of information in multimodal data comprehension , we provide empir-ical evidence of how the composition of multimodal communication influences how people engage with data. Seeing a visualization first fosters exploration, while reading the text first triggers confirmation. Understanding and deliberately harnessing the power of this sequence is not merely a design choice: it can help designers create more effective, ethical, and insightful data communication. 9ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We thank the reviewers for their insightful comments. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under grant NSF IIS-2046725 and NSF IIS-1764089. 

REFERENCES 

[1] A Vivid View of Extreme Weather: Temperature Records in the U.S. in 2021 (Published 2022) — nytimes.com. https: //www.nytimes.com/interactive/2022/01/11/climate/ record-temperatures-map-2021.html . [Accessed 30-01-2026]. 5 [2] America Is Using Up Its Groundwater Like There’s No Tomorrow (Published 2023) — nytimes.com. https: //www.nytimes.com/interactive/2023/08/28/climate/ groundwater-drying-climate-change.html . [Accessed 30-01-2026]. 5 [3] Giant Batteries Are Transforming the Way the U.S. Uses Electricity (Published 2024) — nytimes.com. https: //www.nytimes.com/interactive/2024/05/07/climate/ battery-electricity-solar-california-texas.html . [Ac-cessed 30-01-2026]. 6 [4] Graphics — nytimes.com. https://www.nytimes.com/spotlight/ graphics . [Accessed 30-01-2026]. 1, 2, 3 [5] How New Rules Turned Back the Clock on Baseball (Published 2023) — nytimes.com. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2023/05/ 24/upshot/up-baseball-metrics.html . [Accessed 30-01-2026]. 6 [6] T. Alves, R. Velhinho, J. Henriques-Calado, D. Gonçalves, and S. Gama. Studying the resiliency of the anchoring bias to locus of control in visu-alization. Inf. Vis. , 23(1):67–83, 2024. doi: 10.1177/14738716231213987 

3[7] R. Amar, J. Eagan, and J. Stasko. Low-level components of analytic activity in information visualization. In IEEE Symposium on Informa-tion Visualization (InfoVis) , pp. 111–117, 2005. doi: 10.1109/INFVIS.2005. 1532136 2[8] B. Bach, N. H. Riche, S. Carpendale, and H. Pfister. The emerging genre of data comics. IEEE computer graphics and applications , 37(3):6–13, 2017. doi: 10.1109/mcg.2017.33 1, 2 [9] L. Battle and J. Heer. Characterizing exploratory visual analysis: A literature review and evaluation of analytic provenance in tableau. CGF ,38(3):145–159, 2019. doi: 10.1111/cgf.13678 8[10] L. Battle and A. Ottley. What do we mean when we say “insight”? a formal synthesis of existing theory. IEEE TVCG , 30(9):6075–6088, 2023. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2023.3326698 2, 8 [11] C. X. Bearfield, L. Van Weelden, A. Waytz, and S. Franconeri. Same data, diverging perspectives: The power of visualizations to elicit competing interpretations. IEEE TVCG , 30(6):2995–3007, 2024. doi: 10.1109/tvcg. 2024.3388515 2, 5, 8 [12] M. A. Borkin, Z. Bylinskii, N. W. Kim, C. M. Bainbridge, C. S. Yeh, D. Borkin et al. Beyond memorability: Visualization recognition and recall. IEEE TVCG , 22(1):519–528, 2015. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2015.2467732 

1, 3 [13] M. A. Borkin, A. A. Vo, Z. Bylinskii, P. Isola, S. Sunkavalli, A. Oliva et al. What makes a visualization memorable? IEEE TVCG , 19(12):2306–2315, 2013. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2013.234 3[14] J. Boy, F. Detienne, and J.-D. Fekete. Storytelling in information visu-alizations: Does it engage users to explore data? In 2015 ACM CHI Conference , pp. 1449–1458, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2702123.2702452 2[15] J. D. Bradbury and R. E. Guadagno. Documentary narrative visualization: Features and modes of documentary film in narrative visualization. Inf. Vis. , 19(4):339–352, 2020. doi: 10.1177/1473871620925071 1[16] K. Caine. Local standards for sample size at CHI. In 2016 ACM CHI Conference , pp. 981–992, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2858036.2858498 4[17] D. Ceneda, T. Gschwandtner, T. May, S. Miksch, H.-J. Schulz, M. Streit et al. Characterizing guidance in visual analytics. IEEE TVCG , 23(1):111– 120, 2016. doi: 10.47379/ict19047 8[18] S. Chen, J. Li, G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, Y. Wang, P. H. Nguyen et al. Supporting story synthesis: Bridging the gap between visual analytics and storytelling. IEEE TVCG , 26(7):2499–2516, 2018. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2018. 2889054 2[19] I. Cho, R. Wesslen, A. Karduni, S. Santhanam, S. Shaikh, and W. Dou. The anchoring effect in decision-making with visual analytics. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST) , pp. 116–126. IEEE, 2017. doi: 10.1109/vast.2017.8585665 3[20] W. S. Cleveland and R. McGill. Graphical perception: Theory, experimen-tation, and application to the development of graphical methods. Journal of the American statistical association , 79(387):531–554, 1984. doi: 10. 1080/01621459.1984.10478080 1, 2 [21] B. D. Douglas, P. J. Ewell, and M. Brauer. Data quality in online human-subjects research: Comparisons between mturk, prolific, cloudresearch, qualtrics, and sona. Plos one , 18(3):e0279720, 2023. doi: 10.1371/journal. pone.0279720 3[22] W. R. Fisher. Narration as a human communication paradigm: The case of public moral argument. Communications monographs , 51(1):1–22, 1984. doi: 10.1080/03637758409390180 3[23] S. L. Franconeri, L. M. Padilla, P. Shah, J. M. Zacks, and J. Hullman. The science of visual data communication: What works. Psychologi-cal Science in the Public Interest , 22(3):110–161, 2021. doi: 10.1177/ 15291006211051956 1, 2 [24] W. J. Friedman. Memory processes underlying humans’ chronological sense of the past. Time and memory: Issues in philosophy and psychology ,pp. 139–167, 2001. doi: 10.1093/oso/9780198250357.003.0006 3[25] D. Gotz and M. X. Zhou. Characterizing users’ visual analytic activity for insight provenance. Inf. Vis. , 8(1):42–55, 2009. doi: 10.1057/ivs.2008.31 1, 8[26] S. Hao, Z. Wang, B. Bach, and L. Pschetz. Design patterns for data-driven news articles. In 2024 ACM CHI Conference , pp. 1–16, 2024. doi: 10. 31219/osf.io/q5fa3 2[27] M. A. Hearst. Show it or tell it? text, visualization, and their combination. 

Communications of the ACM , 66(10):68–75, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3593580 

1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 12 [28] T. Hoßfeld, M. Hirth, J. Redi, F. Mazza, P. Korshunov, B. Naderi et al. Best practices and recommendations for crowdsourced qoe-lessons learned from the qualinet task force crowdsourcing. In Seventh International Workshop on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX) , 2014. doi: 10. 1109/qomex.2015.7148150 4[29] J. Hullman and N. Diakopoulos. Visualization rhetoric: Framing effects in narrative visualization. IEEE TVCG , 17(12):2231–2240, 2011. doi: 10. 1109/tvcg.2011.255 2, 3 [30] J. Hullman, S. Drucker, N. H. Riche, B. Lee, D. Fisher, and E. Adar. A deeper understanding of sequence in narrative visualization. IEEE TVCG ,19(12):2406–2415, 2013. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2013.119 2, 3 [31] J. Kandel, J. Liu, A. Z. Wang, C. Tseng, and D. Szafir. Graphical percep-tion of icon arrays versus bar charts for value comparisons in health risk communication. IEEE TVCG , 2026. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2025.3634630/mm1 

2[32] Y.-S. Kim, P. Kayongo, M. Grunde-McLaughlin, and J. Hullman. Bayesian-assisted inference from visualized data. IEEE TVCG , 27(2):989– 999, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3028984 2[33] C. N. Knaflic. Storytelling with data: A data visualization guide for busi-ness professionals . John Wiley & Sons, 2015. doi: 10.1002/9781119055259 

2[34] H.-K. Kong, Z. Liu, and K. Karahalios. Frames and slants in titles of visualizations on controversial topics. In 2018 ACM CHI Conference , pp. 1–12. ACM, New York, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3173574.3174012 1, 3, 7, 8 [35] H.-K. Kong, Z. Liu, and K. Karahalios. Trust and recall of information across varying degrees of title-visualization misalignment. In 2019 ACM CHI Conference , pp. 1–13. ACM, New York, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3290605. 3300576 3[36] S. Kulkarni, R. Thomas, M. Komorowski, and J. Lewis. Innovating online journalism: New ways of storytelling. Journalism Practice , 17(9):1845– 1863, 2023. doi: 10.1080/17512786.2021.2020675 2[37] K. S. Lashley et al. The problem of serial order in behavior , vol. 21. Bobbs-Merrill Oxford, 1951. doi: 10.1037//0003-066x.49.2.93 3, 8 [38] K. Lerman. Information is not a virus, and other consequences of human cognitive limits. Future Internet , 8(2):21, 2016. doi: 10.3390/fi8020021 3[39] S. Li, T. J. Davidson, C. Xiong Bearfield, and E. Wall. Confirmation bias: The double-edged sword of data facts in visual data communication. In 

2025 ACM CHI Conference , pp. 1–16, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3706598.3713831 

1, 2, 7 [40] A. Lundgard and A. Satyanarayan. Accessible visualization via natural language descriptions: A four-level model of semantic content. IEEE TVCG , 28(1):1073–1083, 2021. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2021.3114770 1, 9 [41] M. L. McHugh. Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic. Biochemia medica , 22(3):276–282, 2012. 4 [42] S. McKenna, N. Henry Riche, B. Lee, J. Boy, and M. Meyer. Visual narrative flow: Exploring factors shaping data visualization story reading 

10 © 2026 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.202x.xxxxxxx/ 

experiences. In CGF , vol. 36, pp. 377–387. Wiley Online Library, 2017. doi: 10.1111/cgf.13195 2[43] A. A. Narechania. Designing, Developing, and Democratizing Guidance for Visual Analytics . PhD thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology, 2024. doi: 10.1109/vis54862.2022.00010 8[44] Y. M. M. Ng. How the new york times uses information graphics and data visualizations for hard news and soft news and to foster audience engagement. 2014. doi: 10.3886/icpsr07819.v1 3[45] L. M. Padilla, S. H. Creem-Regehr, M. Hegarty, and J. K. Stefanucci. Deci-sion making with visualizations: a cognitive framework across disciplines. 

Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications , 3(1):1–25, 2018. doi: 

10.1186/s41235-018-0120-9 2[46] S. Palan and C. Schitter. Prolific. ac—a subject pool for online experiments. 

Journal of behavioral and experimental finance , 17:22–27, 2018. doi: 10. 1016/j.jbef.2017.12.004 4[47] P. Pirolli and S. Card. The sensemaking process and leverage points for analyst technology as identified through cognitive task analysis. In 

International Conference on Intelligence Analysis , vol. 5, pp. 2–4, 2005. doi: 10.1037/e577042012-048 3[48] G. J. Quadri and P. Rosen. A survey of perception-based visualization studies by task. IEEE TVCG , 28(12):5026–5048, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TVCG. 2021.3098240 2[49] G. J. Quadri, A. Z. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Adorno, P. Rosen, and D. A. Szafir. Do you see what i see? a qualitative study eliciting high-level visualization comprehension. In 2024 ACM CHI Conference , pp. 1–26. ACM, New York, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3613904.3642813 1, 2, 5, 8 [50] M. D. Rahman, G. J. Quadri, B. Doppalapudi, D. A. Szafir, and P. Rosen. A qualitative analysis of common practices in annotations: A taxonomy and design space. IEEE TVCG , 2024. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2024.3456359 3[51] M. Rogha, S. Sah, A. Karduni, D. Markant, and W. Dou. The impact of elicitation and contrasting narratives on engagement, recall and attitude change with news articles containing data visualization. IEEE TVCG ,30(7):4375–4389, 2024. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2024.3355884 1[52] J. Roozenbeek, C. R. Schneider, S. Dryhurst, J. Kerr, A. L. Freeman, G. Recchia et al. Susceptibility to misinformation about covid-19 around the world. Royal Society open science , 7(10):201199, 2020. doi: 10. 1098/rsos.201199 8[53] D. M. Russell, M. J. Stefik, P. Pirolli, and S. K. Card. The cost structure of sensemaking. In INTERACT’93 and CHI’93 conference on Human factors in computing systems , pp. 269–276, 1993. doi: 10.1145/169059.169209 2[54] E. Segel and J. Heer. Narrative visualization: Telling stories with data. 

IEEE TVCG , 16(6):1139–1148, 2010. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2010.179 1, 2, 3, 8 [55] P. Shah and E. G. Freedman. Bar and line graph comprehension: An interaction of top-down and bottom-up processes. Topics in cognitive science , 3(3):560–578, 2011. doi: 10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01066.x 2[56] C. Stokes, C. X. Bearfield, and M. A. Hearst. The role of text in visualiza-tions: How annotations shape perceptions of bias and influence predictions. 

IEEE TVCG , 30(10):6787–6800, 2023. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2023.3338451 1, 3[57] C. Stokes, V. Setlur, B. Cogley, A. Satyanarayan, and M. Hearst. Striking a balance: Reader takeaways and preferences when integrating text and charts. IEEE TVCG , 2022. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2022.3209383 1, 3 [58] C. D. Stolper, B. Lee, N. H. Riche, and J. Stasko. Data-driven storytelling techniques: Analysis of a curated collection of visual stories. In Data-driven storytelling , pp. 85–105. AK Peters/CRC Press, 2018. doi: 10. 1201/9781315281575-4 3[59] C. B. Stone and A. C. Jay. From the individual to the collective: The emergence of a psychological approach to collective memory. Applied Cognitive Psychology , 33(4):504–515, 2019. doi: 10.1002/acp.3564 3[60] N. Sultanum, F. Chevalier, Z. Bylinskii, and Z. Liu. Leveraging text-chart links to support authoring of data-driven articles with vizflow. In 2021 ACM CHI Conference , pp. 1–17, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3411764.3445354 2[61] D. A. Szafir. Modeling color difference for visualization design. IEEE TVCG , 24(1):392–401, 2018. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2017.2744359 2[62] D. A. Szafir, R. Borgo, M. Chen, D. J. Edwards, B. Fisher, and L. Padilla. 

Visualization Psychology . Springer Nature, New York, 2023. doi: 10. 1007/978-3-031-34738-2 1[63] B. Tang, A. Boggust, and A. Satyanarayan. Vistext: A benchmark for semantically rich chart captioning. In 61st ACL Conference , pp. 7268– 7298, 2023. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.401 1[64] C. Tseng, A. Z. Wang, G. J. Quadri, and D. Albers Szafir. Shape it up: An empirically grounded approach for designing shape palettes. IEEE TVCG ,2025. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2024.3456385 2[65] C. Tseng, A. Z. Wang, G. J. Quadri, and D. Albers Szafir. Redundant is not redundant: Automating efficient categorical palettes design unifying color & shape encodings with CatPAW. In 2026 ACM CHI Conference ,2026. doi: 10.1145/3772318.3791244 2[66] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases: Biases in judgments reveal some heuristics of thinking under uncertainty. science , 185(4157):1124–1131, 1974. doi: 10.1126/science.185 .4157.1124 3, 6 [67] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman. Rational choice and the framing of deci-sions. In Multiple criteria decision making and risk analysis using mi-crocomputers , pp. 81–126. Springer, 1989. doi: 10.1017/cbo9780511803475 .013 3, 7, 8 [68] A. C. Valdez, M. Ziefle, and M. Sedlmair. Priming and anchoring effects in visualization. IEEE TVCG , 24(1):584–594, 2017. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2017 .2744138 3[69] M. Vlasceanu, K. Enz, and A. Coman. Cognition in a social context: A social-interactionist approach to emergent phenomena. Current Di-rections in Psychological Science , 27(5):369–377, 2018. doi: 10.1177/ 0963721418769898 3[70] K. Wahl-Jorgensen and T. R. Schmidt. News and storytelling. In The handbook of journalism studies , pp. 261–276. Routledge, 2019. doi: 10. 4324/9781315167497-17 2[71] A. Z. Wang, D. Borland, E. Calcaterra, and D. Gotz. Contextualization or rationalization? the effect of causal priors on data visualization interpreta-tion. IEEE TVCG , 2026. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2026.3663050 2, 3, 8 [72] A. Z. Wang, D. Borland, and D. Gotz. Beyond correlation: Incorporating counterfactual guidance to better support exploratory visual analysis. IEEE TVCG , 2025. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2024.3456369 8[73] A. Z. Wang, D. Borland, T. Peck, W. Wang, and D. Gotz. Causal priors and their influence on judgements of causality in visualized data. IEEE TVCG , 2025. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2024.3456381 2, 7 [74] A. Z. Wang, G. J. Quadri, M. Zhu, C. Tseng, and D. Albers Szafir. Char-acterizing visualization perception with psychological phenomena: Un-covering the role of subitizing in data visualization. IEEE TVCG , 2026. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2025.3634807 1, 2 [75] D. L. Wanzer, T. Azzam, N. D. Jones, and D. Skousen. The role of titles in enhancing data visualization. Evaluation and Program Planning ,84:101896, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2020.101896 3[76] C. Ware. Information visualization: perception for design . Elsevier, 2012. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-381464-7.00007-7 2[77] P. C. Wason. On the failure to eliminate hypotheses in a conceptual task. 

Quarterly journal of experimental psychology , 12(3):129–140, 1960. doi: 

10.1080/17470216008416717 8[78] K. Williams, A. Bigelow, and K. E. Isaacs. Data abstraction elephants: The initial diversity of data representations and mental models. In 2023 ACM CHI Conference , pp. 1–24, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3544548.3580669 2, 8 [79] C. Xiong, C. Stokes, Y.-S. Kim, and S. Franconeri. Seeing what you believe or believing what you see? belief biases correlation estimation. 

IEEE TVCG , 29(1):493–503, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2022.3209405 3, 7 [80] C. Xiong, L. Van Weelden, and S. Franconeri. The curse of knowledge in visual data communication. IEEE TVCG , 26(10):3051–3062, 2019. doi: 

10.31219/osf.io/xc7e8 3, 8, 13, 14 [81] L. Yang, X. Xu, X. Lan, Z. Liu, S. Guo, Y. Shi et al. A design space for applying the freytag’s pyramid structure to data stories. IEEE TVCG ,28(1):922–932, 2021. doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2021.3114774 2[82] Q. Zhi, A. Ottley, and R. Metoyer. Linking and layout: Exploring the integration of text and visualization in storytelling. In CGF , vol. 38, pp. 675–685. Wiley Online Library, 2019. doi: 10.1111/cgf.13719 2[83] Z. Zhou. An Examination of Analytic Focus and Perception During Ex-ploratory Visual Analysis . PhD thesis, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3411764.3445674 3[84] Z. Zhou, X. Wen, Y. Wang, and D. Gotz. Modeling and leveraging analytic focus during exploratory visual analysis. In 2021 ACM CHI Conference ,pp. 1–15. ACM, New York, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3411764.3445674 3[85] J. Zong, C. Lee, A. Lundgard, J. Jang, D. Hajas, and A. Satyanarayan. Rich screen reader experiences for accessible data visualization. CGF ,41(3):15–27, 2022. doi: 10.1111/cgf.14519 9

11 Table 3: Visualization types and counts for NYT visual graphics published from 2020 to 2024. The Others chart type includes non-traditional charts, such as treemaps, pictograms, parallel coordinates, flow diagrams, and Sankey diagrams, that seldom appeared in the corpus. 

Visualization Types Map Line Chart Bar Chart Area Chart Scatterplot Others Counts 110 22 21 13 6 9

> Table 4: Topics and counts in the chosen visual graphics.

Topic Temperature Energy Farming Health Sports Friends Daily Activities Diet Disaster Snowfall Counts 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

APPENDIX 

A STIMULI SELECTION 

Table 3 and Table 4 show overviews of all reviewed visual graphics and selected topics from the final stimuli. Below shows the stimuli selection criteria and process. • Common and Familiar : We focused on common visualization types and topics. We removed those that may be less familiar (such as rotated parallel coordinates) or too complex (such as a combination of area charts and connected scatterplots) for the general public. We avoid data on topics that need specific domain knowledge (e.g., aerospace technology) or may elicit political sentiment (e.g., election data). 53 visualizations were excluded under this criterion. • Clarity and Readability : Charts were required to be legible at the study display size (e.g., readable axis labels and legends at 16 or 14 pixel minimum respectively). 30 visualizations were excluded under this criterion. • Stable Static Representation : Only static images (no interactive versions, such as animated flow diagrams and Sankey charts) were used to avoid potential confounds. Any charts that heavily relied on interaction for core content were excluded. 25 visualizations were excluded under this criterion. • Textual Specificity : The accompanying paragraphs needed to in-clude sufficient explanatory or contextual information (not merely a one-line caption) so that text could plausibly change or refine a reader’s comprehension. Charts with purely decorative or unre-lated text were excluded. 11 visualizations were excluded under this criterion. • Neutral Attribution : To avoid bias from strong source signals, articles and graphics that explicitly named potentially polariz-ing, professional, or authoritative organizations or individuals in proximate text were avoided as these organizations may shift how readers weigh different pieces of information (e.g., weighing explicit expert interpretation more heavily than raw data). 3 vi-sualizations were excluded For the rest, identifying information was removed when present to mitigate potential bias. • Topic and Visualization Diversity : We ensured a range of di-verse topics and visualization types (as summarized in Table 1 and Table 4) to avoid results driven by a single domain or visual-ization type. Stimuli were randomly sampled from visualizations meeting the above criteria, with the final selection limited to no more than three stimuli for each visualization type and up to two stimuli on a same topic. 

B INSIGHTS FROM IN-P ERSON PARTICIPANTS 

B.1 Visualization First Chain – The Aha! Moment 

We observed an Aha! moment—a moment of visible, positive knowl-edge construction and engagement—at least once for all thinkaloud participants when they encountered the text after the visualization. When the text explained an observation or hypothesis they had gen-erated from the visual patterns, sometimes participants showed clear behavioral differences, such as heightened posture, responsive facial expression, and verbal exclamations—all of them (8/8 P) literally said “Aha! ” at least once. For instance, after studying the visualization on California Electric-ity Power (Figure 5), all participants (4/4 P) started to wonder why “batteries ” increase in usage in the second half of the chart, which the text in the second phase of the chain explained (“ soak up excess solar power during the day and store it for use when it gets dark. ”). For example, I3 hypothesized aloud about batteries “ saving solar power ”as the cause. I8 noticed the X-axis of time and the “ more flatten power usage during the day ”, assuming the corresponding increase in battery usage was due to “ getting over-generated daytime power ”. Upon read-ing the text, they noted feeling “ surprised ” or “ so smart ”, and both praised themselves for correctly hypothesizing the cause. Two other participants focused on other reasons for the rise like “ transferring gas usage .” After seeing the text, they responded verbally in ways indicat-ing their new understanding, such as “ Aha, that makes sense ” [ I1] or “So that explains this big change ” [ I5]. Such moments of validation highlighted how people were able to pair visual evidence with text to support hypothesis generation and validation in the visualization-first chain. These moments not only appear in confirming or explaining a hy-pothesis, but also when reducing confusion in uncertain understanding and correcting potential false discoveries. In the Average Baseball Game Length stimulus (Figure 4), the text explained the annotated re-duction in game length in 2023 is because of “ a series of rule changes ”[text]. All participants first noted the overall increasing trend in the historical data but then expressed confusion in the sudden reduction and uncertainty in their comprehension, noting feeling “ strange ” [ I2]or “ not confident ” [ I3 ] about the apparent anomaly. After seeing the text that explained rule changes at that year, participants felt they better understood the data, noting “ Oh I totally missed it ” [ I2] and that the change now “ definitely makes sense ” [ I6]. These instances illustrate a different but equally significant “Aha” moment: one of correction. The exploratory path is both about forming correct hypotheses and using the text as a corrective mechanism, resolving the ambiguity of an isolated visualization and helping to fill in complexities or uncertainties in data which are difficult to resolve through visualization alone [27]. When the visualizations show an obvious pattern like a change or outlier that can be easily captured in comparison, people are more likely to hypothesize a reason behind them. In such cases, the text, especially when it provides externalized easy-to-understand reasons that do not appear in the charts’ annotations, can help people make more sense of the data, lending context for deeper reasoning and preventing false discovery or conclusions. However, when the chart is more complex, as in a distorted area chart (see stimulus 7 in OSF), or the additional contextual information is well-known (e.g., global warming, stimulus 11 in OSF), these moments are less likely to arise: we found no evidence of any such “Aha!” behaviors in the two charts. 

B.2 Text First Chain – That (Text) is Correct 

The behavior observed in the text-first chain during the thinkaloud participants additionally demonstrated this confirmatory approach. A common behavior, either stated explicitly or implied through their reasoning, among all participants was to use the visualization to simply say, “ That (text) is correct. ”12 © 2026 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.202x.xxxxxxx/ 

Let’s review the same examples that other participants see visualization-first feel “ Aha ”. In California Electricity Power (Fig-ure 5), upon viewing the chart after reading the text, all participants simply noted, “ That is correct ” [ I2 ] or “ Batteries do help ” [ I7]. Unlike the visualization-first chain’s Aha moments, none of them reported find-ings like how the gas usage was reduced or how the daily total power usage was flattened. Similarly, in Average Baseball Game Length (Fig-ure 4), instead of analyzing the increasing trend from the zero point, which was a critical piece of the “Aha!” moments in the visualization-first chain, they immediately viewed the data points in 2023 and stated like, “ the new rules make a big change ” [ I1] or “ this [the downward shift in value] is what happened in 2023 turned baseball back to 1980 ”[I5 ]. Overall, the visualization was not treated as a source of new insight but as a source to validate the primed knowledge. We did not observe any “Aha!” moments when viewing the visualizations in the text-first chain. In contrast to the visualization-first chain, the text-first thinkaloud responses to the visualizations did not provide moments of new discovery or synthesis or expressions of surprise or validation, but instead universally expressed alignment with the original text. 

C OPERATIONALIZING MULTIMODEL DATA COMPREHENSION 

FRAMEWORK 

In this appendix, we introduced a more detailed discussion on how the proposed multimodel data comprehension framework in Section 4.3 can characterize user behaviors in the two chains. 

C.1 Characterizing the Visualization-First Chain 

As summarized in the left half of Table 2, the visualization-first chain induced a bottom-up style reasoning process, where people typically started with raw visual evidence and worked their way toward a conclu-sion about the data through text, usually associated with causation. The visualization acts as a tool for discovery, capable of revealing insights without restrictions. People’s experiences and subsequent descriptions reflected a progression from curiosity and inquiry to resolution. Overall, the visualization-first chain led to a synthesized understanding where evidence from both modalities were woven together. The final compre-hension tended to be a rich and balanced combination of visual patterns and narrative context. For example, people who first saw a visualization of the Global Temperature (see Figure 6), reported a diverse range of initial compre-hensions that heavily relied on different visual patterns, such as: “Starting around 1975, monthly global temperatures have exceeded the average for the 20th century. ” [ P57], “Monthly global average temperatures have increased over 1 degrees celsius compared to the average for the 20th century. Almost all of the rise has been since the early 70’s when a steady rise in average temperatures began with the most recent year showing 5 months at record high levels. ” [ P59 ]. Initial comprehensions for this chart varied significantly, including extremes, trends, changes, value ranges, and periodic patterns. After viewing the accompanying text, participants integrated the textual in-formation to complement their understanding of visual patterns. The two comprehension stated above were revised to: “Global temperatures have increased significantly in the last 150 years, with monthly records being set consistently in the recent past. ” [ P57], “2023 was the hottest year on record since record keeping began 174 years ago. 2023 was the hottest ever record and the final 5 months were the hottest months on record. Global average temperature in 2023 was nearly 1.5 celsius higher than the average for the 2nd half of the 19th century and warmer than the 2nd hottest year in 2016 by a large margin. ”[P59]. Their revised comprehension includes additional information, like “ in the last 150 years ” and “ the hottest year since 174 years ago ” to better contextualize the visual patterns, but still covers a range of different observations in visual patterns, including patterns that were not discussed in the text. 

> Figure 6: The visual graphic of Global Temperature.

People’s self-reported reasoning strategies reflected this overarch-ing process in the visualization-first chain. For example, P43 noted in the Disaster and Climate Risks example (see OSF supplements) that “When I see the chart first, I get an immediate visual un-derstanding of the geographic distribution and intensity of climate risks. It shows where different threats like wild-fires, water stress, and hurricanes are concentrated. Then, when I read the text, it helps me understand the broader context, explains the causes and impacts, and connects the data to real-life consequences, making the information more meaningful. ”For the US Electronic Generation example (see OSF supplements), P7described that “Looking at the chart, I first see coal decline and the rise of natural gas and wind. The text then explains when and why this shift happened, showing how it reduced emissions and pollution. Together, they make the trend and its impact much clearer. ”These strategies match the exploratory comprehension pattern described above: participants first form a preliminary understanding of the over-all data from visualized patterns, then the text provides context and explanations of the causes behind data patterns to help people better comprehend the data and expand their awareness and understanding. 

C.2 Characterizing the Text-First Chain 

Conversely, illustrated in the right half of Table 2, the text-first chain is more likely to produce a top-down reasoning process. People began with the abstract claims from the text and used the visualization to find concrete evidence for that predefined claim. The resulting comprehen-sions suggest participants actively trying to validate the text’s narrative, and are often revised with a sense of confirmation. The visualization, therefore, was treated as an auxiliary illustration of the textual informa-tion. People’s experience was less about exploring something new and more about reinforcing what was already learned from the text. This produced a confirmatory understanding, where the textual narrative dominated people’s perception of the data and potentially masked other details in the visualization, similar to the Curse of Knowledge [80]. The final comprehension was typically a restatement of the text’s main point. Viewing the same Global Temperature stimulus described above (Figure 6), people’s comprehensions in the text-first chain focused on the hottest year and the impact of climate change, in contrast to the statistical orientation seen in the visualization-first chain. For example, 13 “2023 was the hottest year ever in at least 174 years, maybe even longer. Every month from June to December set new heat records. People are worried that global warming is happening faster than before. ” [ P42], “Climate change is having an effect on our environment through the documented change in temperature which lends to the idea of global warming. 2023 was the warmest year in the past 174 years when temperatures in June surpassed previous records. ” [ P48]. After viewing visualizations, they gathered evidence to support the claims from in their initial comprehension and closing with confirma-tory language explicitly framing the added statistical information as evidence: “The chart shows that the Earth is getting warmer over time. Since the 1970s, there have been more hot months than cool ones. In 2023, the hottest month ever was recorded, showing that global warming is happening. ” [ P42], “Not only was June of 2023 the hottest month on record in the last 174 years but temperature average has gradually increased during a 12-month span since 1850 which lends to further evidence of global warming due to climate change. ”[P48]. Their final comprehensions heavily focused on claims about climate change, which is a major piece of information from the text but not explicitly described in the chart. Similarly, people reported reflective insights as core to their reason strategy for the data from the text-first chain. For example, P25 said, “I like reading an explanation in text first, then having it enhanced with charts. I like the text to tell me what I’m going to see and to help me interpret what the chart means. With text first, I grasp charts much more quickly. ”

P45 stated, “When looking at the text first I am gathering the biggest takeaway and then I look at the chart and try to see how I can prove that takeaway with the data. ”

P58 simply concluded, “ I draw a conclusion and see if the chart con-firms it. ” All of these strategies reflected a framing or confirmation-based behavior, where the understanding of the chart serves as a sec-ondary supplement to the text. 

C.3 Framework Summary 

Overall, applying our framework to the data comprehension and self-reported strategies employed by participants demonstrates that multi-modal data comprehension can lead to different comprehension patterns depending on the order in which people attend to each modality. The visualization-first chain promotes an exploratory bottom-up behavior to allow exploratory comprehension, enabling people to actively explore visual evidence, form independent hypotheses, and seek textual context for resolution. Conversely, the text-first chain elicits a top-down and confirmatory behavior, where the initial text establishes a strong frame of narrative, causing people to primarily seek to validate that frame by matching it to the visual evidence. This difference determines whether a visualization is treated as a tool for discovery or as an illustration of a story already told. As summarized in the left half of Table 2, the visualization-first chain induced a bottom-up style reasoning process, where people typically started with raw visual evidence and worked their way toward a conclu-sion about the data through text, usually associated with causation. The visualization acts as a tool for discovery, capable of revealing insights without restrictions. People’s experiences and subsequent descriptions reflected a progression from curiosity and inquiry to resolution. Overall, the visualization-first chain led to a synthesized understanding where evidence from both modalities were woven together. The final compre-hension tended to be a rich and balanced combination of visual patterns and narrative context. Conversely, illustrated in the right half of Table 2, the text-first chain is more likely to produce a top-down reasoning process. People began with the abstract claims from the text and used the visualization to find concrete evidence for that predefined claim. The resulting comprehensions suggest participants actively trying to validate the text’s narrative, and are often revised with a sense of confirmation. The visualization, therefore, was treated as an auxiliary illustration of the textual information. People’s experience was less about exploring something new and more about reinforcing what was already learned from the text. This produced a confirmatory understanding, where the textual narrative dominated people’s perception of the data and potentially masked other details in the visualization, similar to the Curse of Knowledge [80]. The final comprehension was typically a restatement of the text’s main point. 

D CODEBOOK 

Table 5 shows the employed codebook and coded exam-ples with users’ quotes. Our codebook consisted of two groups of codes: Comprehension-Related Codes (e.g., INI-TIAL_VIS_COMPREHENSION codes how people’s comprehen-sion based on the visualization first reflects the data, and 

INFO_GAIN_FROM_TEXT codes new information that the revised comprehension gained from the text) and User Experience and Strategy-Related Codes (e.g., STRATEGY_VIS_FIRST codes user described a specific strategy for interpreting the visualization-first chain, and 

PREFERENCE_VIS_FIRST codes user explicitly states a preference for seeing the visualization first). 1. Comprehension-Related Codes :• INITIAL_VIS_COMPREHENSION: Initial comprehension based on the visualization first. • INITIAL_TEXT_COMPREHENSION: Initial comprehension based on text first. • INFO_GAIN_FROM_TEXT: The revised comprehension shows significant new information gained from the text (e.g., specific numbers, context, “ why ”). • INFO_GAIN_FROM_VIS: The revised comprehension shows new information gained from the visualization (e.g., visual pat-terns, magnitude of change). • CONFIRMATION: The second modality is used to confirm what was learned from the first. • CORRECTION: The second modality corrects a misinterpretation from the first. • SYNTHESIS: The participant integrates both visual and textual information into a balanced coherent final understanding. 2. User Experience and Strategy-Related Codes :• PREFERENCE_TEXT_FIRST: Participant explicitly states a preference for seeing the text first. • PREFERENCE_VIS_FIRST: Participant explicitly states a pref-erence for seeing the visualization first. • DIFFERENCE_VIS_VS_TEXT: Participant provides commen-tary on the perceived difference in the two approaches. • STRATEGY_VIS_FIRST: Participant describes a specific strat-egy for interpreting a chart without context (e.g., “ I look for a trend ”). • STRATEGY_TEXT_FIRST: Participant describes a specific strat-egy for interpreting a chart with prior context (e.g., “ I look for the numbers mentioned in the text ”). 14 © 2026 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.202x.xxxxxxx/ 

> Table 5: Codebook used to analyze the data, themes, and behaviors in our analysis user quotes examples.
> (a) Comprehension-Related Codes and User Quotes

Code Example Quotes 

INITIAL_VIS_COMPREHENSION “...most people when they get home are just relaxing and eating and drinking ... ” [ P44 ]

INFO_GAIN_FROM_TEXT “...a big reason is COVID pandemic... ” [ P44] 

INITIAL_TEXT_COMPREHENSION “...there has been a new all-time (temperature) record from each country each year... ”[P20] 

INFO_GAIN_FROM_VIS “...1994 and 2021 are definitely extreme cases... ” [ P20] 

CONFIRMATION “Yes the chart shows and illustrates the data stated in the text... ” [ P40] 

CORRECTION “...but they have issued new rules like pitch clock to shorten length of games. ” [ P12] 

SYNTHESIS “Climate change affects the US differently, including stronger hurricanes in the South and east, drought in the center and wildfires in the West. ” [ P50] 

> (b) User Experience and Strategy-Related Codes and User Quotes

Code Example Quotes 

PREFERENCE_TEXT_FIRST “I’d rather read it first. I don’t think I like the idea of just seeing charts for this kind of information. It can be confusing for me. ” [ P24] 

PREFERENCE_VIS_FIRST “I prefer seeing a chart first and it conveys information more effectively... ” [ P38]. 

DIFFERENCE_VIS_VS_TEXT “The differences is different the ways you look at solving a problem or answering a question... ” [ P23] 

STRATEGY_VIS_FIRST “The chart demonstrates the information visually so for me that helps me understand it better... ” [ P40] 

STRATEGY_TEXT_FIRST “I read the text and then imagine what a chart may look like in order to represent that data that is given. Is the data trending up or down? ” [ P48] 

E STIMULI 

Stimulus 1 

Figure 2 shows the visual graphic of the US Temperature Record, and below are its corresponding text paragraphs: 

There is temperature data from more than 7,800 weather sta-tions across the United States, most stations have recorded temperature for at least 65 years. All-time records have been set somewhere in the country every year since at least 1970, but 2021 stands alone when compared with recent years. Heat waves in 2002 and 2012 brought unprecedented temperatures to hundreds of cities and towns. Like 2021, 2011 broke numerous cold and heat records. But 2021’s extreme temperatures were spread across large areas of the country and surpassed even more records. 

Stimulus 2 

Figure 4 shows the visual graphic of Average Baseball Game Length, and below are its corresponding text paragraphs: 

Baseball’s future may look a lot like its past. Nearly two months into the 2023 season, a series of rule changes — including the new pitch clock, enlarged bases and a ban on the infield shift — has translated into a game that evokes the 1980s more than the 2020s. At 2 hours 39 minutes, the average game is almost half an hour shorter than it was last season, and about the same length as it was in the 1980s. 

Stimulus 3 

Figure 5 shows the visual graphic of the California Electricity Power, and below are its corresponding text paragraphs: 

California draws more electricity from the sun than any other state. It also has a timing problem: Solar power is plentiful during the day but disappears by evening, just as people get home from work and electricity demand spikes. To fill the gap, power companies typically burn more fossil fuels like natural gas. That’s now changing. Since 2020, California has installed more giant batteries than anywhere in the world apart from China. They can soak up excess solar power during the day and store it for use when it gets dark. 

Stimulus 4 

> Figure 7: The visual graphic of US Electronic Generation.

Figure 7 shows the visual graphic of the US Electronic Generation, and below are its corresponding text paragraphs: 

Natural gas surpassed coal as the country’s top source of power in 2016, and renewables like wind and solar have grown quickly to become major players in the U.S. power system. Fossil fuels still generate the majority of America’s electricity, but the shift from coal to natural gas and re-newable power has helped reduce planet-warming carbon dioxide emissions and other harmful pollution. In 2023, coal was the top electricity fuel in 10 states, down from 32 states in 2001. Natural gas largely took over during that time, but wind also emerged as a leading power source across the Midwest. 

15 Figure 9: The visual graphic of Deaths from Drug Mixtures. 

Stimulus 5 

Figure 3 shows the visual graphic of the Farming and Underground Water in Kansas, and below are its corresponding text paragraphs: 

There’s little water left to lay down in Wichita County, in Western Kansas. The wells have begun to go dry. Irrigation can more than double the amount of corn grown per acre. As farms in the area use up the groundwater, corn yields have declined, erasing decades of gains. As recently as the late 1990s, Wichita County farmers produced 165 to 175 bushels of corn per acre, well above the national average. But it came at a cost, requiring farmers to drain the aquifer in order to irrigate their crops. The area gets less than 20 inches of rain a year, on average, about one-third less than the continental United States as a whole — not nearly enough to replace the water being pumped from the ground. As farmers ran out of water, they increasingly switched to what’s called dryland farming, relying on rain alone. 

Stimulus 6 

> Figure 8: The visual graphic of US Snowfall.

Figure 8 shows the visual graphic of the US Snowfall, and below are its corresponding text paragraphs: 

2023’s snow season is a tale of two starkly different winters: A cold and snowy one in the West, and a warm and rela-tively snowless one in the East. The Western United States received a lot more snow than usual this season, much of it unleashed by punishing storms that battered California especially hard throughout the winter. Parts of the East-ern half of the country, however, saw much less snow than normal amid unusually warm winter temperatures. It’s not uncommon for the two coasts to experience opposing weather conditions. This can happen when the jet stream, a band of winds that blow from west to east around the planet, starts to meander into a wavelike pattern. This wind pattern results in cooler conditions where it dips southward and warmer conditions where it arcs northward. 

Stimulus 7 

Figure 9 shows the visual graphic of the Deaths from Drug Mixtures, and below are its corresponding text paragraphs: 

Last year over 70,000 Americans died from taking drug mix-tures that contained fentanyl or other synthetic opioids. The good news is that recent data suggests a decline in overdose deaths, the first significant drop in decades. But this is not a uniform trend across the nation. To understand this dis-parity, it’s important to examine how we got here. Today’s crisis is often described as a series of waves. But if you look at the data, it was more like a couple of breakers followed by a tsunami. First, prescription opioid fatalities rose. Then heroin deaths surged. And finally, illicitly manufactured fentanyl overtook all that preceded it. 

Stimulus 8 

> Figure 10: The visual graphic of Friends and Income.

Figure 10 shows the visual graphic of the Friends and Income, and below are its corresponding text paragraphs: 

The pressure that parents feel to try to give their kids a competitive advantage is amplified when society is unequal and there’s more to be lost. Our society is structured in ways that discourage these cross-class friendships from happening, and many parents are making choices about where to live and what extracurriculars to put their kids into that make those friendships less likely to happen. As a result, rich people have mostly rich friends, and poor people have mostly poor friends. Low-income people are far more likely than high-income people to make friends in their neighborhoods. But in poorer areas, there are fewer rich people nearby to befriend. 

Stimulus 9 

Figure 11 shows the visual graphic of the Activities At Home, and below are its corresponding text paragraphs: 

Americans’ time spent at home increased by 1 hour 39 minutes a day, or 10 percent, from 2003 through 2022. The rise in working at home during the pandemic has been a big chunk of that, taking up 29 percent of all work activity in 2022. Other activities followed a similar track — a gradual rise over years followed by a spike during the pandemic that was still felt sharply in the first two months of 2022. As of 2022, time that Americans had once spent outside the home participating in activities like education, eating and drinking, had, to some extent, moved into the home. The largest shift occurred with religious activities: 59 percent occurred at home in 2022, up from 24 percent in 2003. 

16 © 2026 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.202x.xxxxxxx/ 

> Figure 11: The visual graphic of Activities At Home.

Stimulus 10 

> Figure 12: The visual graphic of Americans’ Changing Diet.

Figure 12 shows the visual graphic of the Americans’ Changing Diet, and below are its corresponding text paragraphs: 

America’s striking dietary shift in recent decades, toward far more chicken and cheese, has not only contributed to con-cerns about American health but has taken a major, undocu-mented toll on underground water supplies. These transfor-mations are tied to the changing American diet. Since the early 1980s, America’s per-person cheese consumption has doubled, largely in the form of mozzarella-covered pizza pies. And last year, for the first time, the average American ate 100 pounds of chicken, twice the amount 40 years ago. 

Stimulus 11 

> Figure 13: The visual graphic of Global Temperature.

Figure 13 shows the visual graphic of the Global Temperature, and below are its corresponding text paragraphs: 

2023 is the Earth’s warmest year in the past 174 years, and very likely the past 125,000. Global temperatures started blowing past records midyear and didn’t stop. First, June was the planet’s warmest June on record. Then, July was the warmest July. And so on, all the way through December. Av-eraged across last year, temperatures worldwide were 1.48 degrees Celsius, or 2.66 Fahrenheit, higher than they were in the second half of the 19th century. That is warmer by a sizable margin than 2016, the previous hottest year. One hypothesis, perhaps the most troubling, is that the planet’s warming is accelerating, that the effects of climate change are barreling our way more quickly than before. 

Stimulus 12 

> Figure 14: The visual graphic of Disaster and Climate Risks.

Figure 14 shows the visual graphic of the Disaster and Climate Risks, and below are its corresponding text paragraphs: 

For most of us, climate change can feel like an amorphous threat — with the greatest dangers lingering ominously in the future and the solutions frustratingly out of reach. Thinking this way: looking at the most significant climate threat unfolding in your own backyard. Transforms the West Coast’s raging wildfires into “climate fires.” The Gulf Coast wouldn’t live under the annual threat of floods but of “climate floods.” Those are caused by ever more severe “climate hurricanes.” The Midwest suffers its own “climate droughts,” which threaten water supplies and endanger crops. Every single county has some sort of climate threat that’s either emerged and is doing some damage right now or is going to emerge. 

17