Title: Processing at Phrase Boundaries During Self-Paced Reading

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
Processing at Phrase Boundaries During Self -Paced 

# Reading 

Jenna Hooper* 1, Julia Dengler* 1,2 , David Basilico 3, Matthew Nelson 1

*These authors contributed equally to the manuscript 

1 D epartment of Neurosurgery, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, A L, USA. 

2 Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 

USA .

3 Division of Linguistics, Department of English, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 

Birmingham, A L, USA. 

Correspondence:  matthewnelson@uabmc.edu 

## Abstract 

Sentence comprehension requires the incremental construction of syntactic structure and 

semantic interpretation. Prior neural work (Nelson et al., 2017) identified key neural events at 

major phrase boundaries during sentence comprehension. To investigate a behavioral correlation 

of these processes, we used self -paced reading to examine the impact of syntactic phase 

boundaries, semantic congruence, and sentence structure on sentence processing. Participants 

read object -relative, subject -relative, and canonic al control sentences one word at a time and a 

subsequent comprehension task. Reading times were analyzed relative to phrase boundaries, 

node -closing operations, and semantic congruence. Object -relative sentences produced the 

greatest processing difficulty, demonstrated by increased reading times and decreased 

comprehension accuracy. Reading times peaked at the phrase boundaries, indicating that 

processing costs are tied to constituent completion rather than individual lexical categories. 

Reading times also increased with the number of syntactic constituents completed at a phrase 

boundary. Agent -patient semantic congruence produced its largest effects in object -relative 

sentences, suggesting that semantic information interacts with syntactic computations when 

processing demands are greatest. These findings demonstrate that self -paced reading is sensitive 

to the incremental processing associated with syntactic constituent completion. Processing costs 

are tied more closely to phrase completion than to individual lexical categories, scale with the 

amount of syntactic structure completed at a boundary and interact with agent -patient semantic 

interpretation during object -relative sentence comprehension. Together, these findings support a 

view of sentence comprehensi on in which syntactic structure building and semantic 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

interpretation proceed incrementally and interact continuously throughout online language 

processing. 

## Introduction 

Linguistic theories of sentence processing propose that sentences are read as hierarchical 

structures of nested phrases rather than a linear sequence of words (Berwick et al., 2013; 

Chomsky, 1957; Haegeman, 2005; Sportiche et al., 2013) . In this theory, constituents, or groups 

of words that function as a unit, are built and completed while reading. The places where the 

constituents are completed, or phrase boundaries, are proposed to be important locations of 

integration, where both sema ntic and syntactic information are processed. However, phrases and 

phrase boundaries investigated through self -paced reading have been underexplored in the 

literature. 

In investigating behavioral results of periodic neural activity of self -paced reading, Lo et al., 

(2023) found that that participants’ response times slow at the phrase boundaries. This is likely 

due to chunking, where the participant pauses to consolidate information together to begin new 

chunking. This process can decrease memory demands, leading to easier processing of a 

sentence. 

Neurophysiological evidence also supports the view of comprehension as an incrementally built 

phrase structure. Nelson et al., (2017) demonstrates a neural merging process where the parsing 

of constituents occurs, occurring shortly after the last word of each syntactic constituent. These 

results support that there is a location at phrase boundaries where integration occurs, making 

these boundaries good targets for further studying of sentence processing mechanisms. 

In psycholinguistics, differences in processing difficulty between subject relative clauses and 

object relative clauses have been studied to understand processing of complex syntactic 

comprehension. 

1) The cat that chased the dog was brown. 

2) The cat that the dog chased was brown. 

These sentences demonstrate two kinds of relative clauses. In subject relative sentences 

(Sentence 1), the head noun phrase (NP) “cat” is the subject of the relative clause “that chased 

the dog”. In object relative sentences (Sentence 2), the head NP “cat” is the object of the relative 

clause “that the dog chased”. 

There is a large ongoing discussion of why object relative sentences are more difficult to process 

than subject relative sentences, and this asymmetry has been found consistently across various 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

experimental methods (Caplan & Waters, 1998; Caramazza & Zurif, 1976; King & Just, 1991) .

Several theories have been proposed to explain this phenomenon, and they fit into three 

categories: frequency -based, memory -based, and semantic accounts (Gordon & Lowder, 2012) .

Frequency -based accounts describe that the frequency of syntactic structures impacts their 

difficulty, with less encountered structures being more difficult to process. Memory -based 

accounts describe difficulty arising from encoding and retrieving syntactic information during 

comprehension. Semantic based accounts describe that the meaning of the grammatical 

componen ts can influence the ease o f understanding the sentence. 

Frequency 

One explanation for the higher difficulty in processing ORCs focuses on differences in 

experience with different sentence structures. Frequency -based accounts describe that readers 

find it easier to process sentence structures they have encountered most of ten. Corpus analysis 

supports this view by showing that that SRCs occur more frequently in English than ORCs 

(Gordon & Hendrick, 2005; Roland et al., 2007) . Due to more experience processing SRCs, 

readers may find those structures easier. Frequency -based accounts are further supported by 

Reali & Christiansen (2007) ’s finding that processing difficulty does not just depend upon the 

sentence structure, but also the frequency of types of pronouns within noun phrases. In English, 

ORCs are more likely than SRCs to contain a personal pronoun as the embedded noun phrase. 

1) [SRC] “The reporter that attacked you admitted the error.” 

2) [ORC] “The reporter that you attacked admitted the error.” 

Reali & Christiansen (2007) found that when SRC and ORC sample sentences use personal 

pronouns (see Sentences (1) and (2)), participants read ORCs faster than SRCs. This result 

demonstrates that ORC difficulty cannot be fully explained by memory constraints alone. 

Instead, it suggest s that frequency of sentence constructions and one’s experience with them can 

impact comprehension speed. 

This account is further supported by Wells et al., (2009) ’s findings that participants who 

practiced reading ORC later processed these structures more quickly, which suggest that 

experience can reduce comprehension difficulty. Similarly, MacDonald & Christiansen, (2002) 

found that that the highly frequent N -V-N sequence present in SRCs may contribute to their ease, 

compared to the less common N -N-V-V of ORCs. Other frequency -based accounts elaborate that 

the larger frequency of SRC structures leads to greater certainty re ading them and thus making 

them easier to predict than ORCs. 

There are some troubles with this frequency -based explanation, as it does not fully explain the 

processing asymmetry between ORCs and SRCs. Gordon & Hendrick (2005) note how in corpus 

data, SRCs often have an intransitive embedded verb, while ORCs always have a transitive one. 

When SRC with an intransitive verb are removed from the corpus, the difference in frequency 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

between SRC and ORC decreases greatly. This raises the “grain problem” (Gordon et al., 2004; 

Mitchell et al., 1995) , which argues that frequency -based theories should specify how experience 

is influencing processing. 

Memory 

Memory -based accounts argue that the ORC -SRC asymmetry is associated with memory 

limitations during complex sentence processing, describing greater cognitive demands on 

memory. Unlike SRCs, ORC head nouns cannot be immediately integrated into the sentence, and 

it instead must be held in working memory until encountering the embedded verb and 

establishing grammatical roles. This additional process is considered to make sentence 

processing more difficult. 

The early theories concerning memory -based accounts mainly attributed the asymmetry to 

limitations on working -memory capacity. These accounts argued that readers must devote 

cognitive resources to maintaining unattached noun phrases while simultaneously pr ocessing the 

rest of the sentence, increasing the possibility that memory capacity will be overloaded (Just & 

Carpenter, 1992; King & Just, 1991) .

More recent studies have broadened from just working memory, and have focused on linguistic 

influences on memory retrieval processes. The cue -based parsing framework (Lewis et al., 2006; 

Lewis & Vasishth, 2005; Van Dyke & Lewis, 2003) describes reader using linguistic cues at the 

embedded verb to assign which noun phrase from memory. ORCs are particularly difficult 

because the parser must retrieve the correct noun phrase from among competing noun phrases.. 

Retrieval becomes more diffic ult when the noun phrases exhibit similar characteristics and are 

thus harder to distinguish. 

Two major theories arose to explain the impact of memory demands on processing difficult of 

ORCs. One is the dependency locality theory (Gibson, 1998, 2000; Grodner & Gibson, 2005) 

which describes comprehension becoming more difficult as the number of intervening discourse 

referents increases between the NP and its integration with a verb. In object relative clauses, the 

head noun must remain active across multiple intervening disco urse referents before it can be 

integrated with the embedded verb. Sentences with more intervening referents require greater 

memory resources and are processed less efficiently, thus explaining a cause for the greater ORC 

processing difficulty. The depende ncy locality theory is supported by the givenness hierarchy in 

which high accessible referents, like “I” or “you”, have relatively low processing costs due to 

their established existence in the discussion. In contrast, less accessible referents, like speci fic 

noun phrases like “the senator”, have higher processing costs due to the effort of maintenance 

and retrieving, and thus increases memory demands. 

A second theory is the similarity -based interference account, which argues that processing 

difficulty depends less on distance between noun phrases and instead on their similarity (Gordon 

et al., 2001, 2002, 2004; Van Dyke & Lewis, 2003; Van Dyke & McElree, 2006) . While reading, 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

both noun phrases are stored in memory until encountering the embedded verb, where the reader 

would then assign the appropriate thematic roles, such as agent and patient roles. When the noun 

phrases are very semantically or syntactically similar, they are easier to confuse and their 

thematic role assignment becomes more difficult. Therefore, ORC processing difficulty is 

described to arise from retrieval problems, and not just memory storage constraints. 

Semantics 

Semantic accounts argue that processing difficulty is influenced by the meaning relationships in 

a sentence, in which the meaning of a sentence is more straightforward or natural with a SRC 

than an ORC. In these theories, comprehension is easier if the sem antic properties support the 

expected syntactic interpretations, and harder if the semantic relationships are less common or 

likely. 

One line of research suggests that the SRC versus ORC asymmetry is decreased when there is an 

inherent semantic relationship between the critical noun phrases. King & Just (1991) found that 

readers experienced less difficulty processing object relative clauses when the nouns shared 

semantic features, compared with sentences in which the relationship between the nouns was 

random. These results show that semantic information can imp act sentence interpretation and 

somewhat decrease the processing difficulty typically experienced with ORCs. 

A related explanation describes a perspective shift during comprehension. MacWhinney & Pléh, 

(1988) proposed that object relative clauses modifying a subject head noun require readers to 

shift perspective while constructing the sentence representation. This additional perspective shift 

is not present in subject relative clauses, making SRCs comparativel y easier to understand. 

Another semantic approach focuses on animacy of the critical noun phrases in relative clause 

processing (Traxler et al., 2002) . The general results show that ORC is particularly difficult when 

the unattached head noun is animate and the embedded noun is inanimate. However, this 

processing asymmetry is decreased when the head noun is inanimate and the embedded noun is 

animate, whi ch suggests that readers' expectations about the plausibility of thematic roles also 

influence comprehension. 

Traxler et al., (2002) proposed these findings in relation to the active filler strategy, which 

describes that readers initially predict a relative clause will follow the more common subject 

relative clause structure when encountering the complementizer “that”. When this expect ation is 

incorrect, the sentence must be reanalyzed. Reanalysis is more difficult when the extracted head 

noun is animate because animate nouns are often interpreted as agents rather than as patients. In 

contrast, inanimate noun phrases are more easily int erpreted as patients or objects, which makes 

reanalysis less difficult. 

Phrase boundaries 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ORCs are shown to be more difficult than SRC and control sentences throughout many studies, 

but none investigate the effect of the phrase boundary for ORCs and SRCs. Their processing 

difficulty polarity is known, but exactly why is still not fully understo od, which makes them 

interesting stimuli for comparison of syntax and sentence comprehension. 

Therefore, should the object relative clause difficulty be associated with processes like memory 

retrieval and semantic interpretation, these effects should be observable at the phrase boundaries. 

To study the effect of the phrase boundary for ORCs and SRC s, we created a self -paced reading 

task to study response times and processing of ORCs, SRCs, and control sentences. 

## Methods 

Participants 

We recor ded self -paced reading tasks from 35 healthy participants, all of whom were native 

English speakers. Participants were compensated $5 for their time . All study procedures were 

approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. 

Participants reviewed an IRB -approved information sheet and consented to participate in 

accordance with the approved protocol. The experiment took about 30 minutes to complete. 

Experimental Procedure 

We administered the experiment in EPrime 3.0 (Psychology Software Tools) on a Windows 

laptop with a touch screen. Participants were seated comfortably at a table with the laptop at a 

comfortable distance in front of them. We asked participants to read and comprehend sentences 

presented visually, one word at a time . Words were presented in the center of the screen in 100 

point bolded Arial font with the first word of each sentence capitalized and the rest of the text in 

lowercase . Before each sentence, a plus sign was shown on the screen waiting for the participant 

to initiate the sentence. Participants pressed t he space bar to advance past the plus sign and then 

to each subsequent word in the sentence . The experimenter explicitly instructed each participant 

to advance through the sentences at whatever pace they preferred, so long as they could 

successfully answer the comprehension question presented after each sentence. We did not 

inform participants that their reading times would be analyzed . At the end of each sentence, 

participants were presented with four pictures, and their task wa s to choose which of the pictures 

correspond ed to the sentence they just read . Participants responded by touching that picture on 

the laptop screen with their finge r and their touch position was recorded. Participants completed 

2 blocks of 80 sentences each , with a self -timed break between the 2 blocks .

Sentence stimuli 

The sentence stimuli included four sentence structure s: object relative (OR) sentences (e.g. , The 

cat that the dog chased was brown ), subject relative (SR) sentences ( The cat that chased the dog 

was brown ), subject -modifie r canonical (SMC) sentences ( The brown cat chased the dog ) and 

object -modifier canonical (OMC) sentences ( The cat chased the brown dog ). The content of the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

sentences w as always 

imageable in the pictures 

presented at the end of the 

sentence. The 4 pictures 

presented simultaneously 

probe d patient/agent 

assignment (i.e. , who chased 

whom?) and noun -complement 

assignment (was the cat or the 

dog brown?) independently in a 

2x2 design (Figure 1). In e ach 

trial 1 of the 4 pictures wa s

correct, 1 picture reflect ed a

agent -patient error, 1 reflect ed 

a noun -complement error, and 

1 reflect ed both errors 

simultaneously. When the participant makes an error this allows us to understand which of these 

mappings were misunderstood. 

Each sentence require s four semantic content role s- the first noun, the second noun, the verb and 

the noun -complement. All nouns in these content roles were animate and always introduced in 

the sentences with the definite determiner the . The complement content role was typically an 

adjective (e.g., brown ), but for a subset of items it consisted of a noun or noun phrase that served 

as the complement of the sentence predicate (e.g., headphones in wore headphones ). The 

sentence set was comprised of 30 unique combinations of these four content roles with each 

corresponding to the same set of four pictures. We generated the specific sentences using custom 

MATLAB (MathWorks) code that constructed the sentence wording from the four content roles 

and the desired sentence structure. The final sentence set included 57 OR sentences, 45 SR 

sentences, 33 SMC sentences, and 25 OMC sentences . The number of trials per sentence 

structure slightly favored OR sentences due to scientific interest. All presented sentences 

belonged to one of the se four experimental structure types . Overall t he stimulus set was designed 

to maximize the number of informative trials while maintaining participant engagement and 

comprehension accuracy. The 30 unique content role combin ations were presented in cycles 

where each one of the 30 content role combinations was presented in that cycle before starting 

the next cycle of combinations. We ensured that no instances of a content role combinations 

occurred within 10 trials of each other, which otherwise could occur at the cycle boundaries. 

To induce variation in the verb tenses and the sentence and phrase lengths, we generated the 

sentences in four different verb tense /aspect combinations : simple present ( e.g., “chases”), 

present progressive (“is chasing”), simple past (“chased”), and past progressive (“was chasing”).   

> Figure 1. The four pictures show an example of the pictures shown after one of the
> sentences. The pictures comprise a 2x2 design independently probing the participant’s
> comprehension of the patient -agent relationship in the sentence ( Who is chasing whom? )
> and the complement -noun relationship ( Is the cat or the dog brown? ). The sentences show
> the four different sentence structures presented.
> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Each tense could be represented using the same set of pictures. The tense was randomly applied 

to each sentence independently of all other experimental manipulations. Each tense was used the 

same number of times in the sentences . In the OR and SR sentence types, the copular verb 

introducing the predicate (i.e., is or was ) matched the tense of the main verb: is was used with 

the present -tense conditions, and was was used with the past -tense conditions. 

To create variation in the part of speech present at the phrase boundary of OR sentences, we used 

prepositional verbs (e.g., to speak to ) as the main verb in 33 of the 160 sentences, with the 

remaining main verbs being non -prepositional (e.g., chases ). 

To investigate how semantic information affects the processing occurring at phrase boundaries, 

we manipulated the semantic congruity of two aspects of the sentences. We manipulated the 

agent -patient mapping of the sentences to have 3 levels of semantic congruity: congruent (e.g. 

The cop arrested the robber. ), reversible ( The lawyer that spoke to the judge was tall. ) and 

incongruent ( The robber arrested the cop. ). Similarly, we independently manipulated the 

complement -noun assignment of the sentences to have 3 levels of semantic congruity: congruent 

(e.g. The striped tiger chased the lion. ), reversible ( The brown dog chased the cat. ) and 

incongruent ( The striped lion ch ased the tiger. ). 

Analyses 

Preprocessing. We analyzed the per -word reaction time s (RTs) reading the sentence as the 

primary dependent measure of interest . W e also analyzed the picture choice of the participants at 

the end of the sentence and their response time making that picture choice as secondary 

dependent measures of interest. We exclude d implausibly long RTs (>30 seconds) and the first -

word s of trials when the RT of the first word was unusually long (>0.7 seconds). The first word 

of each sentence always start ed with the word the , so latencies that long likely reflect task 

initiation and distract ion at the onset of the sentence rather than sentence -level processing. Some 

OMC sentences became structurally ambiguous when constructed from items whose predicate 

contained a noun complement (e.g., The cop arrested the robber wearing blue ). These trials were 

excluded from analyses involving the OMC condition (n=5) .

For the across -participant analyses of Figure 5, f or plotting purposes we threw out one outlier 

subject that had a baseline RT that was just over twice that of the next nearest participant .

However, this participant was included in the associated statistical tests that we report , and their 

inclusion or exclusion did not affect the signif icance pattern of the results .

Mixed -effects regression overview . We analyzed the per -word RTs using linear mixed -effects 

models with random intercepts for participants and items that we fit using the fitglme function in 

MATLAB . We fit the models assuming a normal error distribution after log -transforming reading 

times, which provided a reasonable approximation to normality. We defined i tem -level random 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

effects over the 30 unique semantic item combinations rather than the 160 individual sentence 

realizations of these because multiple sentence realizations shared the same underlying lexical -

semantic content, allowing repeated observations of each item. The appropriate n uisance 

variables (described below) were included only as fixed effects in every model . When 

experimental predictors were included , we included them as both fixed effects and random 

slopes across participants and items . Sentence structure type (OR, SR, SMC, and OMC) was 

included as an experimental variable in the base model for all analyses. Additional candidate 

experimental predictors included word position, a phrase boundary indicator, the number of open 

nodes, the number of nodes closing, and the agent -patient and comple ment -noun semantic 

congruence reveal -point variables (described below). 

Whenever an additional experimental predictor was included, its two -way interaction with 

sentence structure type was always also included as a fixed effect, reflecting the possibility that 

the predictor's effect could differ across sentence structures. Corresponding random slopes for 

both the main effect and the interaction were included across participants. For items, random 

slopes were included only for the main effects of all the experimental predictors including 

sentence structure type and not for their interactions with sentence structure type. This more 

parsimonious random -effects structure was adopted because each semantic item combination 

was observed only five to six times, providing limited information to estimate item -specific 

interaction slopes r eliably. Including interaction slopes across items would have substantially 

increased model complexity without sufficient repeated observations per item to support stable 

estimation .

We also explored m odels including additional three -way interactions of scientific interest; 

however, all such models failed to converge. 

Semantic congruence reveal points. The semantic congruence variables were coded as four -

level categorical predictors with the values Not revealed yet , Congruent , Reversible , and 

Incongruent . At the beginning of each sentence, both semantic congruence variables were coded 

as Not revealed yet . Once sufficient linguistic information had been presented to determine the 

semantic relationship of interest, the variable transitioned to the appropriate final state for the 

sentence (Congruent , Reversible , or Incongru ent ) and remained at that value for each word for 

the remainder of the sentence. 

Because the point at which semantic congruence becomes available is not uniquely defined, we 

evaluated several plausible operational definitions of the reveal point for both the agent -patient 

and complement -noun congruence variables. 

For the agent -patient congruence variable, we considered four reveal -point definitions: 

1.  At the main verb for all sentence types. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2.  At the preposition following the main verb for prepositional -verb sentences, and at the 

main verb for all other sentence types. 

3.  After the first noun, second noun, and main verb had all been presented. 

4.  As in Option 3, but additionally requiring presentation of the preposition in prepositional -

verb sentences. 

5. 

For the complement -noun congruence variable, we considered two reveal -point s:

1.  After both the first noun and the complement had been presented. 

2.  After the first noun, second noun, and complement had all been presented. 

Phrase boundaries . Each sentence structure has precisely one intra -sentence phrase boundary, 

which is the boundary marking the end of the subject noun phrase of the sentence. The word at 

this boundary, which is the last word of the subject noun phrase, is the first noun for SMC and 

OMC sentences, and the last word of the relative clause for OR and SR sentences. We considered 

the following 3 variations for the phrase boundary indicator variable in our models :

1.  One indicator variable set to 1 at any phrase boundary during the sentence and at the 

sentence -final word. 

2.  Two separate indicator variables - one for the phrase boundary in the middle o f th e

sentence and one for the sentence -final word. 

3.  Only an indicator variable for the major phrase boundary in the middle of the sentence. 

Mixed -effects regression model -building procedure. During the initial stages of model 

development, we first determined the operational definitions of the semantic congruence reveal 

points and phrase boundary indicator variables. Because these variables are not uniquely defined, 

we evaluated the plausible definitions described above using our initial approximation of the 

final mixed -effects model. To determine the semantic congruence reveal -point definitions, we 

jointly evaluated all combinations of the agen t-patient and complement -noun reveal -point 

definitions using a model that did not include a phrase boundary predictor. We then selected t he 

combination yielding the lowest Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) for subsequent model -

building analyses. We then evaluated the alternative phrase boundary indicator variables using 

the same model structure. The single "any phrase boundary" indicator (Option 1), which treated 

both within -sentence and sentence -final phrase boundaries as a single predi ctor, provided the 

best and most parsimonious model fit and was therefore adopted for all subsequent analyses. 

Using these operational definitions, we performed forward model building beginning with a base 

model that included sentence structure type. At each step, the addition of each remaining 

candidate experimental predictor to the existing base model was evaluated separately. For each 

candidate predictor being evaluated , we fit two models using MATLAB's fitglme function. In 

both models, the candidate predictor was added to the random -effects structure . O ne model then 

also included the predictor as a fixed effect (and the associated interaction with sentence 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

structure type), whereas the other omitted these fixed effects. We then compared the two models 

in each pair of models using MATLAB's compare method, which performs a likelihood -ratio test 

of the added fixed effects. In this way both models being compared always shared the same 

random effects structure, and we never tested experimental variables as fixed effects without 

corresponding random slopes for participants and items (Barr et al., 2013) . We then ranked 

candidate predictors according to the significance of this likelihood -ratio test, with Bonferroni 

correction applied for the number of predictors under consideration at each model -building step. 

As a secondary measure of model fit, we also compared AIC differences between the paired 

models and we found it to agree with the likelihood -ratio test results in every instance . We then 

added to the model t he predictor providing the strongest evidence for improved model fit and 

repeated the procedure with the remain ing candidate predictors until no additional predictor 

significantly improved model fit. 

Following completion of the forward model -building procedure, we re -evaluated the semantic 

congruence reveal -point definitions using the finalized model structure and selected for the final 

reported analyses the reveal -point definitions that p rovid ed the best overall model fit with the 

finalized model . Because the final model did not include a phrase boundary predictor, we did not 

re -examine the phrase boundary definitions. This re -evaluation resulted in a different optimal 

definition for the agent -patient reveal point than had been used during model building, whereas 

the optimal complement -noun reveal -point definition remained unchanged. Consequently, agent -

patient reveal -point Option 1 and complement -noun reveal -point Option 1 provided the best fits 

in the final model and were used in all reported analyses. 

Nuisance variables - word frequency . We obtained w ord frequenc y values from the SUBTLEX -

US corpus (Brysbaert & New, 2009) , specifically the part -of -speech annotated version of the 

database (Brysbaert et al., 2012) . We derived part -of -speech -specific word frequencies from the 

reported frequencies for each lexical category. We used t he base -10 logarithm of these frequency 

values in all analyses. 

Nuisance variables - Residualized word length. As measures of word length, we considered both 

the number of letters and the number of syllables in each word. We ultimately used the number 

of letters because it correlated more strongly with participant reading times and is the more 

natural measure of le ngth for visually presented text. Because word length and word frequency 

were strongly correlated, we residualized word length with respect to log word frequency. 

Specifically, we fit a linear regression predic ting the number of letters from log word frequency 

across the unique words in the stimulus set and used the resulting residuals as the measure of 

word length in all subsequent analyses. 

Nuisance variables - Surprisal. We computed w ord -level surprisal values using the distilgpt2 

transformer language model (Radford et al., 2019; Sanh et al., 2019) as implemented in Hugging 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Face's transformers library (v4.44.2). Experimental sentences were tokenized using the model's 

byte -pair encoding vocabulary, and word -level surprisal was calculated as the sum of the 

negative log₂ probabilities (bits) of the constituent subword tokens. 

We initially evaluated s urprisal as a potential nuisance covariate because of its well -established 

effects on reading time. However, surprisal was strongly correlated with lexical frequency in the 

present stimulus set (Spearman's ρ = −0.77, p < 10⁻²⁴⁴). Simultaneous inclusion of surprisal and 

lexical frequency produced unstable parameter estimates, consistent with substantial 

multicollinearity. We therefore also evaluated a residualized surprisal measure, obtained by 

removing variance attribut able to lexica l frequency, but this likewise yielded unstable parameter 

estimates. Given this substantial overlap, lexical frequency was retained as the lexical control 

variable because it produced stable parameter estimates across models, and surprisal was omitted 

from the final statistical analyses. 

Nuisance variables - Baseline RT. In order to get a meas ure of the baseline state of the 

participant going into each trial, we defined for each sentence structure a baseline period over the 

first few word s of the sentence before any experimentally consequential words in the sentence 

were reached, with different definitions of the baseline period for each of the sentence structure 

types. For OR sentences, we defined this as everything before the second noun in the sentence 

(i.e., everything from The up to an d including the in: The dog that the cat chased was brown .). 

For SR, SMC and OMC sentences, we defined this as e verything before the main verb in the 

relative clause (i.e., e verything from The up to and including the first was in: The dog that was 

chasing the cat was brown. , or in The brown cat was chasing the dog , or in The cat was chasing 

the brown dog. ). 

Analysis conventions . Unless otherwise indicated, figures display baseline -subtracted word -RT 

residuals to better visualize the effects of interest. To generate these plots, we first computed 

word -RT residuals using the fitglme function and its residuals method after accounting for the 

fixed effects of log word frequency and residualized word le ngth. For each trial, a baseline 

residual was then calculated as the mean residual over the sentence baseline period and 

subtracted from the residual of every word i n that trial. This baseline subtraction reduces the 

influence of trial -to -trial fluctuations in overall response speed while preserving within -sentence 

effects. 

All statistical analyses of word RT were performed on natural log -transformed word RTs, which 

yielded approximately normally distributed data appropriate for the statistical tests we employed. 

Neither residualization nor baseline subtraction was applied to the data used for statistical 

inference. Instead, the corresponding sources of variance were accounted for directly within the 

mixed -effects models through the inclusion of the appropriate nuisance variables. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Question Accuracy and RT analyses . We analyzed overall comprehension accuracy using a 

generalized linear mixed -effects model with a binomial error distribution. The model included 

random intercepts for participants and items (defined as in the word RT analyses) and sentence 

structure type as a fixed effect, with random slopes for sentence structure type across both 

participants and items. To compare the distribution of comprehension error types across sentence 

structure types, we fit a multinomial regressio n model among the error responses using the 

fitmnr function in MATLAB with effects coding . Complement -error served as the reference error 

category .

## Result s

Question Accuracy and RT. A generalized linear mixed -effects model revealed a significant 

effect of sentence structure on comprehension accuracy (Figure 2a., F(3,5421) = 27.25, p <

0.001 ). As anticipated participants committed the most errors on OR sentences, although they 

broadly still showed a reasonably high comprehension rate for those sentences (89.4%) . The 

distribution of error types significantly differed across sentence structure types ( χ² (6) = 28.7. 

p<0.001 ). The proportion of “Both” error type s ( where participants selected the picture that was 

incorrect in terms of both agent -patient mapping and complement -noun mapping ) relative to the 

complement error reference type was significantly elevated in OR sentences ( Wald z = 2.50, p

= .012 ). SMC sentences also yielded significantly lower relative proportions of “Both” errors 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(Wald z = 2. 45 , p = .01 4) and agent -patient errors ( Wald z = 2. 45 , p = .01 4) relative to the 

reference error type .

Per -Word RT. We aligned the per -word RTs at the major phrase boundary of each sentence ,

which was the last word of the relative clause for OR and SR sentences and the first noun for 

SMC and OMC sentences, for raw as well as baseline -corrected residual per -word RTs (Figure 

2b-c.). Participants show considerable RT increases at the phrase boundary specific to OR 

sentences, and to a lesser extent, SR sentences. RTs after the phrase boundary remain elevated 

for these sentence structures . When c omparing later epochs in the experimental session to earlier 

epochs ( Figure S1 ), although participants’ RT globally decreased in later epochs, the phrase 

boundary peak for OR sentences remained. Similarly for question and accuracy analyses ( Figure 

S2 ) although accuracy improve in later relative to earlier epochs, the relatively decreased 

accuracy for OR sentences remained, and the tendency to commit “Both” errors generally 

remained as well. 

Figure 2. (a) The topmost graph displays the percentage participants responded correctly to across sentence structure types. The 

middle graph displays the percentage of trails that displayed agent -patient error, complement error, or both errors together. The 

bottommost graph displays the response times to the comprehension picture questions across sentence types. (b) The graph shows 

response time per -word for the four sentence structures, plotted by the word number from the phrase boundary. (c) The graph shows 

residual r esponse time per -word for the four sentence structures after accounting for the effects of word frequency and word length 

with baseline RT subtraction, plotted by the word number from the phrase boundary. 

> Agent -Patient Error
> Complement Error
> Both Error

Accuracy Across Sentence Structures 

100 

90 

%

Correct 

4

0

% of 

trials 

Question 

RT (s) 

3

4

5

Object 

relative 

Subject 

relative 

Subject -

modified 

canonical 

Object -

modified 

canonical 

## a. 

*** 

*** 

*

**

## b. 

0.3 

Per -word 

RT (s) 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

Word number from phrase boundary 

-6 -4 -2 0 2 4

> Object relative
> Subject relative
> Subject -modified canonical
> Object -modified canonical

0

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

Per -word 

residual 

RT (s) 

Word number from phrase boundary 

-6 -4 -2 0 2 4

## c. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint OR sentences typically have verbs at the phrase boundary (e.g. chased in The dog that the cat 

chased was brown. ). However OR sentences with prepositional verbs have a preposition at the 

phrase boundary (e.g. to in The woman that the waiter spoke to was short. ). We thus compared 

the phrase -boundary -aligned word RTs between prepositional verb and non -prepositional verb 

sentences to observe if the effect at OR phrase boundaries was d ue to the verb or d ue to the 

phrase boundary. The results in Figure 3 show RTs at the phrase boundary preposition elevated 

above the RT of the main verb in OR sentences, reflecting that processing tied to the phrase 

boundary as opposed to processing tied to the verb itself underlies the phrase boundary RT peak 

for OR senten ces. 

As a nother way to inspect th ese effects, for each of the sentence structure types we grouped the 

word RTs acco rding to their semantic content role within the sentence ( the first noun , the verb ,

the second n oun , and the noun -complement) , with comparative categories added for f unction 

words (e.g., determiners and auxiliary verbs) and the preposition following the verb in 

prepositional verb sentences ( Figure 4 ). For this analysis, we excluded words immediately 

following phrase boundaries in relative -clause sentences to minimize contamination of the 

function -word category by spillover from phrase -boundary processing. We ran a mixed -effects 

regression model including sentence structure type, cont ent word type, and their interaction as 

Non -Prepositional Verb Sentences 

Simple 

Tenses  0.4      

> 0.2
> 0
> -
> 0.2
> -6-4-2024
> Word number from phrase boundary
> 6
> Per -word
> residual RT
> (s)
> Per -word
> residual RT
> (s)

Progressive 

Tenses 

Prepositional Verb Sentences        

> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0
> -0.2
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0
> -0.2
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0
> -0.2
> -6-4-2024
> Word number from phrase boundary
> 6
> Figure 3. The four graphs display the residual response times per -word for each of the four sentence structures, placed by the word number
> from the phrase boundary. Sample sentences from the experiment are placed along to show this comparison clearly. The upper -left graph
> shows results for non -prepositional verb sentences with simple tenses. The lower -left shows results for non -prepositional verb sentences with
> progressive tenses. The upper -right shows results for prepositional verb sentences with simple te nses. The lower -right shows results for
> prepositional verbs with progressive tenses.
> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

predictors of interest separately for non -prepositional verb sentences and prepositional verb 

sentences which revealed a significant interaction and main effects for both content word type 

and structure type for both non -prepositional verb sentences (interaction: F(12, 29192) = 6.62 ; p

< 0.001, content word type: 

F(4, 29192) = 6.34 ; p<0.001, 

structure type: F(3, 29192) = 

5.70, p < 0.001) and 

prepositional verb sentences 

(interaction: F(1 6, 8617 ) = 

6.62 ; p < 0.001, content word 

type: F(4, 8617 ) = 6.34 ;

p<0.001, structure type: F(3, 

8617 ) = 5.70, p < 0.001). To 

characterize the significant 

interaction between sentence 

structure and content word 

type, we performed simple -

effects tests of sentence 

structure within each content -

word type using model 

contrasts separately for non -

prepositional verb sentences 

and prepositional verb 

sentences . Significant simple 

effects were followed by 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0 Comp  N1  N2  V Function  N1  N2  V Function Prep Comp 

Non -Prepositional Verb Sentences  Prepositional Verb Sentences 

## a.  b. 

*** 

*

***  ***  *** 

*** 

Per -

word 

Residual 

RT (s) 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0

Figure 4. The two graphs show the residual response times across parts of speech within the four sentence structures. (a) The graph displays 

that of non -prepositional verb sentences, including the following parts of speech: complementizer, first noun, second noun, verb, and 

following functional word. (b) The graph displays that of prepositional verb sentences, including the same parts of speech but adding the 

preposition. Words immediately following phrase boundaries in relative -clause sentences were excluded from th is analysis. Content word type Omnibus test 

Significant 

Pairwise 

Comparison 

F p

Complement F (3, 8617)=19.38 ; p<0.001 OR > SMC 52.47 <.001 

OR > OMC 37.61 <.001 

SR > SMC 28.13 <.001 

SR > OMC 14.51 <.001 

Verb F (3, 8617)=11.59 ; p<0.001 OR > SR 6.76 0.009 

OR > SMC 8.95 0.003 

OR > OMC 33.62 <.001 

SMC > OMC 6.71 0.01 

Preposition F (3, 8617)=14.09 ; p<0.001 OR > SR 13.84 <.001 

OR > SMC 18.14 <.001 

OR > OMC 41.3 <.001 

Function F (3, 8617)=7.07 ; p<0.001 OR > OMC 21.05 <.001 

Complement F (3, 29192) = 10.87; p < .001 OR > SR 3.98 0.046 

OR > SMC 23.5 <.001 

OR > OMC 26.6 <.001 

SR > SMC 20.36 <.001 

SR > OMC 20.43 <.001 

N2 F (3, 29192) = 3.19; p = 0.023 SR > OR 9.2 0.002 

Verb F (3, 29192) = 8.05; p < .001 OR > SR 15.96 <.001 

OR > SMC 17.76 <.001 

OR > OMC 23.6 <.001 

SR > OMC 5.34 0.021 

Prepositional Verb Sentences 

Non-prepositional Verb Sentences 

Table 1. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint pairwise comparisons between sentence structure types. These results are summarized in Table 

1. For non -prepositional verb sentences, the most prominent effect was the increased RT at the 

verbs of OR sentences , where the phrase boundary of those sentences occurs . Notabl y, for 

prepositional verb sentences the most prominent effect was the increased RT a t the prepositions 

of OR sentences, where the phrase boundary of those sentences occurs, although the RT of verbs 

in these sentences was also higher than in o ther sentence structures. This pattern suggests that 

most of this added processing underlying the object -relative pause observed near the phrase 

boundary occurs when the phrase itself is completed, with some of the processing occurring 

when the verb happen s even before the phrase is completed. The significant increased RT at the 

complement for both relative clause sentence structure type s relative to the canonical sentences 

may reflect additional confusion in the complement -to -noun assignment for these sentences as 

well as generally elevated RT s that seem to be present for the rest of the sentence after the phrase 

boundary for these sentences ( Figure 2 ). The significantly increased RT at N2 for SR sentences 

relative to OR sentences corresponds to the phrase boundary that occurs for SR but not OR 

sentences at that word. The increased RT at the verb for SMC relative to OMC sentences may 

reflect additional working memory load relative to the additional complement that has already 

been received in the SMC sentences. 

RT Spillover Effect. We observed an apparent spillover effect in which, for some participants, 

the first word following the OR phrase boundary exhibited a larger RT increase than the phrase -

boundary word itself. We hypothesized that this spillover effect would be more pronounced in 

participants with faster baseline reading speeds because these participants are more likely to 

initi ate the button press for the next word before processing at the phrase boundary has fully 

completed. Under this account, processing triggered by the phrase boundary continues into the 

following word, shifting a portion of the RT cost from the phrase -bounda ry word onto the 

subsequent word. In Figure 5a. we plotted for each participant the mean RT on the words after 

the phrase boundary in OR sentences minus the RT at the phrase boundary word of these 

sentences. Across participants, larger baseline RTs were associated with smaller spillover effects 

at the first word following the phrase boundary (Spearman's ρ = -0.53, p = .001). In contrast, 

baseline RT was unrelated to OR sentence comprehension accuracy (Spearman's ρ = -0.18, p

= .301) or overall comprehension accuracy (Spearman's ρ = 0.12, p = .499), suggesting that the 

relationship between baseline reading speed and spillover is unlikely to simply reflect differences 

in task engagement or comprehension performance and is instead consistent with stable 

individ ual differences in how participants paced their responses during self -paced reading. 

Figure 5b and 5c show the phrase -boundary -aligned word RT profile for the slow -baseline and 

fast -baseline participants using 0.29 seconds as a baseline RT cutoff. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Node closing analys es. To evaluate evidence for the node -tracking framework in self -paced 

reading RTs, we analyzed the effects of the number of closing nodes on relative -clause sentences 

at the phrase boundary, at the word after the phrase boundary (based on the number of nodes 

closing at the phrase boundary immediately preceding it), and at the sentence -final word ( Figure 

6). We tested this used mixed -effects linear models with the parameter of the number of nodes 

closing as a fixed effects parameter with random slopes across participants and items applied to 

each of the se words across the dataset. There was a significant positive effect at the phrase 

Figure 5. (a) The graph displays the spillover effect as a function of the baseline response times. (b) The graph shows the per -word 

residual response times for slow -baseline participants of four sentence structures plotted by the word number distance from the phrase 

boundary. (c) The graph shows the per -word residual response times for fast - participants of four sentence structures plotted by the word 

number distance from the phrase boundary. 

0.4 

0

-0.4 

-0.8 

-1.2 

Spillover 

Effect 

Baseline RT 

0.3  0.4 

Slow -Baseline Participants  Fast -Baseline Participants 

0.4 

0.2 

0

-6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6

Word number from phrase boundary 

Per -word 

residual 

RT (s) 

## a. 

## b.  c. 

0.4 

0.2 

0

-6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6

Word number from phrase boundary 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint boundary word ( t(3376) = 

3.78; p <.001 ), but the effect 

was not significant for the 

word after the phrase 

boundary (p=.857) or the 

sentence -final word (p=.920). 

Canonical sentence analyses .

SMC and OMC sentences 

differ in the position of the 

complement and the noun they 

modify - for SMC sentences 

the complement occurs before 

the main verb and modifies N1 

while in OMC sentences this occurs 

after the verb and modifies N2. We 

compared the two to see if these differences result in subtle word RT difference between the two 

structures. We compared the RTs at N1 and N2 in separate analyses, restricted to instances when 

the complement was an adjective. Thus in each case this amounts to comparing , e.g. the brown 

dog to the d og in instances where that noun phrase is the subject noun phrase at the beginning of 

the sentence in one analysis and the object noun phrase at the end of the sentence in another 

analysis. The results are shown in Figure 7a and 7b . Using a mixed effects model applied to 

these data with structure type as the only experimental predictor, t he difference was not 

significant for the first noun phrase (p=0.436) or the second noun phrase (p=0.944). We further 

tested for a linear increase in RT across the Det -Adj -N triplets pooled main between the SMC and 

OMC sentences, using linear mixed effects model with Phrase Position within this triplet (a 

variable that is 1 for the Determiner, 2 for the adjective and 3 for the noun) as the only 

experimental predictor. The effect was positive and s ignificant ( F(1,4234) = 6.9994; p = .008 ).

This effect is seen more clearly when comparing the raw word RT data between these conditions 

(Figure S3 ).  

> Fewer
> nodes
> closing
> More
> nodes
> closing
> Non -
> baseline,
> Non -phrase
> boundary
> Phrase
> boundary
> After phrase
> boundary
> Sentence end
> Fewer
> nodes
> closing
> More
> nodes
> closing
> Fewer
> nodes
> closing
> More
> nodes
> closing
> 0.1
> 0.2
> Per -word
> residual
> RT (s)
> Object Relative nNodeClosing vs RT Scatter
> Figure 6 . The graph displays the per -word residual response times for each syntactic
> region for the object relative sentences. Excluding the non -baseline non -phrase
> boundary word, which is shown as a reference point, each syntactic region includes
> three data points ordered to show fewer to more nodes closing.
> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

We also plotted the effects for the 

verb region, including the verb 

for non -prepositional verb 

sentences and the main verb plus 

the preposition for prepositional 

verb sentences ( Figure 7c ).

Using a mixed effects model 

applied to these data with 

structure type as the only 

experimental predictor, t he result 

approached significance, with 

SMC sentences having larger RTs 

in the verb regions than OMC 

sentences, but the effects was not 

ultimately significant (p=0.077). 

Semantic congruence analyses 

and regression model -building 

analysis . Sema ntic congrue nce of

the agent -patient mapping had a 

large apparent effect for object 

relative sentences in particular 

(Figure 8 ), being best fit by an 

onset of the effect at the verb that 

persists form there through the 

rets of the sentence. The effect 

follows the anticipated pattern 

with the incongruent trials 

showing the longest RTs, the 

congruent trials with the shortest 

RTs an d the reversible trials with 

-0.04 

-0.06 

-0.08 

Det  Adj  N

Per -word 

residual 

RTs (s) 

0.08 

0.04 

0

-0.04 

V Prep 

Per -word 

residual 

RTs (s) 

Verb Region 

0.06 

0.04 

0.02 

0

Per -word 

residual 

RTs (s) 

Det  Adj  N

First Noun Phrase 

Second Noun Phrase 

## a. 

## b. 

## c.  

> Subject -modified canonical
> Object -modified canonical
> Subject -modified canonical
> Object -modified canonical

Figure 7. The three graphs describe the per -word residual response times for 

subject -modified canonical and object -modified canonical sentences. (a) The graph 

describes the first noun phrase in the sentence structures, including the phrase’s 

determiner, the adjective, and the noun. The graph does not involve baseline 

subtraction because the baseline for these sentences would include this noun phrase. 

Baseline subtraction was also not included as a factor in the corresponding mixed 

effects model used for sig nificance testing this analysis. (b) The graph describes the 

second noun phrase in the sentence structures, including the phrase’s determiner, 

the adjective, and the noun. (c) The graph describes the verb region in the sentence 

structures, including the verb and following preposition. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint RTs in the middle. For completeness in Figure S4 we show the results for the two canonical 

sentence structures grouped according to the semantic congruence of the agent -patient mapping, 

for which there was no effect. 

The final model resulting from the model building procedure we employed is shown in Table 2 .

The semantic congruence of the agent -patient mapping was the first experimental term added to 

the model, followed by the semantic congruence of the noun -complement assignment, and 

finally followed by the numbers of closing nodes , after which no further experimental parameters 

exceeded the significance threshold when considered. 

Predictor  df  F p

Structure Type  3, 39006  6.91  1.20 × 10⁻⁴ 

Number of Nodes Closing  1, 39006  0.02  0.894 

Patient –Agent Semantic Congruence Revealed  3, 39006  4.68  0.00285 

Noun -Complement Semantic Congruence Revealed  3, 39006  2.62  0.0487 

Structure Type × Number of Nodes Closing  3, 39006  3.39  0.0173 

Structure Type × Patient –Agent Semantic 

Congruence Revealed  9, 39006  9.87  2.93 × 10⁻¹⁵ 

Structure Type × Noun -Complement Semantic 

Congruence Revealed  9, 39006  4.05  3.33 × 10⁻⁵ 

0.2 

0.1 

0

Per -word 

residual 

RTs (s) 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

Word number from constituent boundary 

-6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2  

> Object relative, Congruent
> Object relative, Incongruent
> Object relative, Reversible
> Subject relative, Congruent
> Subject relative, Incongruent
> Subject relative, Reversible
> Figure 8. The graph displays the residual response times per -word plotted by their word number from the constituent boundary. Described
> are the object relative and subject relative sentence structures and their plausibility (congruent, reversible, incongruent).
> Table 2. Analysis of variance for the final linear mixed -effects model. Only experimental predictors are shown. The
> model additionally included log word frequency, residualized word length, baseline RT, and part of speech as nuisance
> covariates, together with the r andom effects described in the Methods.
> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Discussion 

In this study, we used self -paced reading to investigate how syntactic structure, semantic 

interpretation, and phrase structure jointly influence online sentence processing. Across several 

complementary analyses, object -relative (OR) sentences consistently produced the greatest 

processing difficulty, reflected by increased reading times at the completion of the relative 

clause, reduced comprehension accuracy, and an increased tendency to commit errors involving 

both agent -patient assignment and complement a ssignment simultaneously. These findings 

replicate the well -established processing cost associated with object -relative clauses while 

providing a more detailed characterization of when during sentence comprehension this cost 

emerges. 

One of the clearest findings was that the largest increase in reading time occurred specifically at 

the completion of the subject noun phrase rather than being tied to a particular lexical category. 

OR sentences with non -prepositional verbs showed their la rgest RT increase at the main verb, 

whereas OR sentences with prepositional verbs instead showed the largest increase at the phrase -

final preposition. Because these two sentence types differ only in the identity of the phrase -final 

word, this finding stron gly suggests that the critical processing is triggered by completion of the 

phrase rather than by processing of the verb itself. Some increased processing was already 

apparent at the main verb of prepositional -verb sentences, suggesting that processing may begin 

as soon as sufficient syntactic information becomes available but reaches its maximum when the 

phrase is completed. 

Our node -closing analysis further supports this interpretation. At phrase boundaries, reading 

times increased as a function of the number of syntactic constituents completed at that word, 

whereas no such relationship was observed at the following word or a t sentence -final boundaries. 

This selective effect is consistent with the proposal that completion of syntactic constituents 

incurs an incremental processing cost during reading. Together with the phrase -boundary 

analyses, these results suggest that self -paced reading captures ongoing syntactic integration 

processes rather than simply reflecting lexical access or generalized sentence difficulty. 

An additional observation concerns the substantial spillover of the phrase -boundary effect into 

the following word for many participants. Participants with faster baseline reading speeds 

exhibited significantly greater spillover despite showing no reduction i n comprehension 

accuracy. This finding is consistent with the idea that faster readers often initiate the button press 

for the following word before processing associated with the phrase boundary has fully 

completed. Consequently, some of the processing co st becomes expressed on the subsequent 

word rather than the phrase -boundary word itself. This observation illustrates an important 

characteristic of self -paced reading data: the temporal location of processing costs may depend 

partly on individual response strategies, even when the underlying linguistic computation is 

similar. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

One of the most interesting findings of the present study was the interaction between semantic 

congruence and syntactic structure. Agent -patient semantic congruence produced its largest 

effects specifically for object -relative sentences, whereas the effect was considerably smaller for 

the other sentence structures. This pattern suggests that semantic information does not simply 

contribute a consta nt processing cost whenever an implausible event is encountered. Instead, 

semantic interpretation appears to int eract with the syntactic computations that are particularly 

demanding in object -relative clauses. 

Object -relative sentences require readers to establish a non -canonical mapping between 

grammatical roles and semantic roles while simultaneously maintaining multiple noun phrases 

across the relative clause. Under these conditions, agent -patient semantic information may 

become especially important for resolving or confirming the intended interpretation. Plausible 

semantic relationships appear to facilitate this process, whereas semantically incongruent 

relationships increase the processing requir ed at precis ely the point where syntactic integration is 

most demanding. The relative absence of comparable semantic effects in subject -relative 

sentences argues against a purely lexical or semantic explanation and instead suggests that 

semantic information specifical ly modulates the computations involved in constructing the 

syntactic representation of object -relative clauses. More broadly, these findings provide an 

example of the close interaction between syntactic parsing and semantic interpretation during 

incrementa l sentence comprehension rather than these processes operating independently. 

Interestingly, the agent -patient congruence variable entered the regression model before any 

other experimental predictor during the forward model -building procedure, indicating that it 

explained more variance than either complement congruence or node -closing effects. This 

emphasizes tha t semantic interpretation contributes substantially to online processing even after 

controlling for lexical variables and sentence structure, while the strong interaction with OR 

sentences indicates that this contribution is closely linked to syntactic difficulty rather than 

representing a simple additive semantic effect. 

In contrast, the complement -congruence effect should be interpreted more cautiously. Although 

statistically reliable in the regression analysis, its direction differed across sentence structures, 

with subject -relative sentences exhibiting the opposite patt ern from that predicted. At present we 

do not have a satisfactory explanation for this finding. Consequently, we view the complement -

congruence result as preliminary and believe it warrants replication before drawing strong 

theoretical conclusions. 

The analyses comparing the two canonical sentence structures also provide several informative 

observations. Overall differences between subject -modifier canonical (SMC) and object -modifier 

canonical (OMC) sentences were relatively subtle, suggesting that t hese structures impose 

broadly similar processing demands. Nevertheless, Figure 4 demonstrated significantly increased 

reading times in the verb region for SMC sentences relative to OMC sentences in prepositional -

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

verb items, consistent with the prediction that SMC sentences require maintenance of a 

completed modifier before processing the verb. Although this effect was modest and was not 

consistently detected across all analyses, its direction agrees with the hypot hesis that the 

additional working -memory demands imposed by SMC sentences produce a measurable, albeit 

relatively small, processing cost. 

The present findings have several methodological implications for studies using self -paced 

reading. First, analyses aligned to linguistically meaningful events, such as phrase boundaries, 

may reveal processing effects that are obscured when data are analyz ed solely according to 

absolute word position. Second, because processing frequently spills over beyond the triggering 

word, particularly for faster readers, analyses that examine only a single word may underestimate 

the true magnitude of processing associ ated with a linguistic event. Finally, the observed 

sensitivity of self -paced reading to constituent completion and node -closing measures 

demonstrates that this relatively simple behavioral paradigm can provide surprisingly detailed 

information about the i ncremental computations underlying sentence comprehension. 

Several limitations should also be acknowledged. The sentence materials were intentionally 

designed to maximize experimental control and permit detailed manipulation of syntactic and 

semantic variables, which necessarily limits the range of sentence constr uctions examined. 

Likewise, the current analyses focus primarily on reading times and behavioral performance 

rather than directly measuring the neural mechanisms underlying these effects. Future studies 

combining comparable sentence manipulations with elec trophysiological or intracranial 

recordings could help identify the neural processes responsible for the phrase -boundary effects 

observed here. 

In summary, the present study demonstrates that self -paced reading is sensitive to the 

incremental processing associated with syntactic constituent completion, particularly during 

comprehension of object -relative clauses. The results indicate that processi ng costs are tied more 

closely to phrase completion than to individual lexical categories, scale with the amount of 

syntactic structure completed at a boundary, and interact strongly with agent -patient semantic 

interpretation specifically when syntactic de mands are greatest. Together, these findings support 

a view of sentence comprehension in which syntactic structure building and semantic 

interpretation proceed incrementally and interact continuously throughout online language 

processing. 

## Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by NIH K01 -DC019165 and K01DC019165 -03S1. Jenna Hooper was 

supported by the UAB Presidential Honors Research Fellowship and the UAB Summer Research 

Academy scholarship .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

We thank Ishita Bhatia and Pooja Mudigonda for assistance with data collection for this study. 

## References 

Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013). Random effects structure for 

confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language ,

68 (3), 255 –278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2012.11.001 

Berwick, R. C., Friederici, A. D., Chomsky, N., & Bolhuis, J. J. (2013). Evolution, brain, and the 

nature of language. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 17 (2), 89 –98. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.12.002 

Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2009). Moving beyond Kučera and Francis: A critical evaluation of 

current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new and improved word 

frequency measure for American English. Behavior Research Methods , 41 (4), 977 –990. 

https://doi.org/10.3758/BRM.41.4.977 

Brysbaert, M., New, B., & Keuleers, E. (2012). Adding part -of -speech information to the 

SUBTLEX -US word frequencies. Behavior Research Methods , 44 (4), 991 –997. 

https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428 -012 -0190 -4

Caplan, D., & Waters, G. (1998). Verbal Working Memory and Sentence Comprehension 

[Preprint]. http://cogprints.org/623/ 

Caramazza, A., & Zurif, E. B. (1976). Dissociation of algorithmic and heuristic processes in 

language comprehension: Evidence from aphasia. Brain and Language , 3(4), 572 –582. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0093 -934X(76)90048 -1

Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic structures . Mouton de Gruyter. 

Gibson, E. (1998). Linguistic complexity: Locality of syntactic dependencies. Cognition , 68 (1), 

1–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010 -0277(98)00034 -1

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Gibson, E. (2000). The dependency locality theory: A distance -based theory of linguistic 

complexity. In Image, language, brain: Papers from the first mind articulation project 

symposium (pp. 94 –126). The MIT Press. 

Gordon, P. C., & Hendrick, R. (2005). Relativization, Ergativity, and Corpus Frequency. 

Linguistic Inquiry , 36 (3), 456 –463. 

Gordon, P. C., Hendrick, R., & Johnson, M. (2001). Memory interference during language 

processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition ,

27 (6), 1411 –1423. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278 -7393.27.6.1411 

Gordon, P. C., Hendrick, R., & Johnson, M. (2004). Effects of noun phrase type on sentence 

complexity. Journal of Memory and Language , 51 (1), 97 –114. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2004.02.003 

Gordon, P. C., Hendrick, R., & Levine, W. H. (2002). Memory -Load Interference in Syntactic 

Processing. Psychological Science , 13 (5), 425 –430. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467 -

9280.00475 

Gordon, P. C., & Lowder, M. W. (2012). Complex Sentence Processing: A Review of Theoretical 

Perspectives on the Comprehension of Relative Clauses. Language and Linguistics 

Compass , 6(7), 403 –415. https://doi.org/10.1002/lnc3.347 

Grodner, D., & Gibson, E. (2005). Consequences of the Serial Nature of Linguistic Input for 

Sentenial Complexity. Cognitive Science , 29 (2), 261 –290. 

https://doi.org/10.1207/s15516709cog0000_7 

Haegeman, L. (2005). Thinking Syntactically: A Guide to Argumentation and Analysis (1 

edition). Wiley -Blackwell. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992). A capacity theory of comprehension: Individual 

differences in working memory. Psychological Review , 99 (1), 122 –149. 

https://doi.org/10.1037/0033 -295X.99.1.122 

King, J., & Just, M. A. (1991). Individual differences in syntactic processing: The role of 

working memory. Journal of Memory and Language , 30 (5), 580 –602. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0749 -596X(91)90027 -H

Lewis, R. L., & Vasishth , S. (2005). An Activation -Based Model of Sentence Processing as 

Skilled Memory Retrieval. Cognitive Science , 29 (3), 375 –419. 

https://doi.org/10.1207/s15516709cog0000_25 

Lewis, R. L., Vasishth, S., & Van Dyke, J. A. (2006). Computational principles of working 

memory in sentence comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 10 (10), 447 –454. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.08.007 

Lo, C. -W., Anderson, M., Henke, L., & Meyer, L. (2023). Periodic fluctuations in reading times 

reflect multi -word -chunking. Scientific Reports , 13 (1), 18522. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -023 -45536 -y

MacDonald, M. C., & Christiansen, M. H. (2002). Reassessing working memory: Comment on 

Just and Carpenter (1992) and Waters and Caplan (1996). Psychological Review , 109 ,

35 –54. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033 -295X.109.1.35 

MacWhinney, B., & Pléh, C. (1988). The processing of restrictive relative clauses in Hungarian. 

Cognition , 29 (2), 95 –141. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010 -0277(88)90034 -0

Mitchell, D. C., Cuetos, F., Corley, M. M. B., & Brysbaert, M. (1995). Exposure -based models of 

human parsing: Evidence for the use of coarse -grained (nonlexical) statistical records. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research , 24 (6), 469 –488. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02143162 

Nelson, M. J., El Karoui, I., Giber, K., Yang, X., Cohen, L., Koopman, H., Cash, S. S., Naccache, 

L., Hale, J. T., Pallier, C., & others. (2017). Neurophysiological dynamics of phrase -

structure building during sentence processing. Proceedings of the National Academy of 

Sciences , 201701590. 

Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., & Sutskever, I. (2019). Language models 

are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog .

Reali, F., & Christiansen, M. H. (2007). Processing of relative clauses is made easier by 

frequency of occurrence. Journal of Memory and Language , 57 (1), 1 –23. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2006.08.014 

Roland, D., Dick, F., & Elman, J. L. (2007). Frequency of basic English grammatical structures: 

A corpus analysis. Journal of Memory and Language , 57 (3), 348 –379. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2007.03.002 

Sanh, V., Debut, L., Chaumond, J., & Wolf, T. (2019). DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: 

Smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter (ArXiv:1910.01108). arXiv. 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01108 

Sportiche, D., Koopman, H., & Stabler, E. (2013). An Introduction to Syntactic Analysis and 

Theory . John Wiley & Sons. 

Traxler, M. J., Morris, R. K., & Seely, R. E. (2002). Processing Subject and Object Relative 

Clauses: Evidence from Eye Movements. Journal of Memory and Language , 47 (1), 69 –

90. https://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.2001.2836 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Van Dyke, J. A., & Lewis, R. L. (2003). Distinguishing effects of structure and decay on 

attachment and repair: A cue -based parsing account of recovery from misanalyzed 

ambiguities. Journal of Memory and Language , 49 (3), 285 –316. 

Van Dyke, J. A., & McElree, B. (2006). Retrieval interference in sentence comprehension. 

Journal of Memory and Language , 55 (2), 157 –166. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2006.03.007 

Wells, J. B., Christiansen, M. H., Race, D. S., Acheson, D. J., & MacDonald, M. C. (2009). 

Experience and sentence processing: Statistical learning and relative clause 

comprehension. Cognitive Psychology , 58 (2), 250 –271. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2008.08.002 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Supplementary figures 

0.4 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0

-0.1 

-4 -2 0 2 4

Word number from constituent boundary 

-6

0.4 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0

-0.1 

0.4 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0

-0.1 

0.4 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0

-0.1 

Epoch 1 

Epoch 2 

Epoch 3 

Epoch 4 

Object relative 

Subject relative 

Subject -modified canonical 

Object -modified canonical 

Figure S1. The graphs compare plots per -word response times across the word 

number from the constituent boundary to describe behavior over four 

succeeding epoch times. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint Epoch 1  Epoch 2 

# Epoch 3  Epoch 4 

> Agent -Patient Error
> Complement Error
> Both Error

100 

90 %

Correct 

4

0

% of 

trials 

Question 

RT (s) 

3

5

7

80 

100 

%

Correct 

80 

4

0

% of 

trials 

Question 

RT (s) 

3

5

7

> Agent -Patient Error
> Complement Error
> Both Error
> Agent -Patient Error
> Complement Error
> Both Error

100 

%

Correct 

4

0

% of 

trials 

Question 

RT (s) 

3

5

7

80 

4

0

% of 

trials 

Question 

RT (s) 

3

5

7

> Agent -Patient Error
> Complement Error
> Both Error

100 

%

Correct 

80 

Object 

relative 

Subject 

relative 

Subject -

modified 

canonical 

Object 

relative 

Subject 

relative 

Object 

relative 

Subject 

relative 

Object 

relative 

Subject 

relative 

Object -

modified 

canonical 

Subject -

modified 

canonical 

Object -

modified 

canonical 

Subject -

modified 

canonical 

Object -

modified 

canonical 

Subject -

modified 

canonical 

Object -

modified 

canonical 

Figure S2 . The graphs compare four different succeeding epochs across the four sentence structures: object relative, subject relative, subject -

modified canonical, and object -modified canonical. Each epoch contains three graphs comparing behavior response to the com prehension 

questions. The topmost graph describes the percentage of accuracy for the comprehension questions. The middle graph describes the percent of 

trials that exhibited a agent -patient error or complement error, or both. The bottommost graph describes the response time of answering the 

comprehension questions. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint Word number from N1 

0.1 

0.05 

0

0 1

Word number from Verb 

> Subject -modified canonical
> Object -modified canonical

0.1 

0.05 

0

-2 -1 0

Word number from N2 

Per -word 

RTs (s) 

> Subject -modified canonical
> Object -modified canonical

Per -word 

RTs (s) 

0.04 

0

-0.04 

-2 0

> Subject -modified canonical
> Object -modified canonical

Per -word 

RTs (s) 

-1

Verb Region 

First Noun Phrase 

Second Noun Phrase 

Figure S3 . The three graphs describe the baseline -subtracted raw (not 

residualized) per -word response times for subject -modified canonical and 

object -modified canonical sentences. The top -left graph describes the RTs for 

the word number from the first noun phrase (N1). The bottom -left graph 

describes the RTs from the second noun phrase (N2). The top -right graph 

describes the word number from the verb. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint 0

0.1 

-0.1 

Pre -word 

residual 

RT (s) 

Word number from constituent boundary 

0-2 -1 1 2 3 4 5

Subject -modified canonical, Congruent 

Subject -modified canonical, Incongruent 

Subject -modified canonical, Reversible 

Object -modified canonical, Congruent 

Object -modified canonical, Incongruent 

Object -modified canonical, Reversible 

Figure S4. The graph describes the per -word residual response times by the word number distance from the 

constituent boundary for the subject -modified canonical and object -modified canonical sentence structures and their 

plausibility (congruent, reversible, incongruent). 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.738177 doi: bioRxiv preprint