Title: Late Integration of Prior Expectations During Precision-Weighted Perceptual Decisions

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
1

Late Integration of Prior Expectations During Precision -Weighted Perceptual 

Decision s

Timothy Gastrell 1, Dragan Rangelov 2, Jason B. Mattingley 1,3 

Author Affiliations :

1.  Queensland Brain Institute 

The University of Queensland 

2.  Department of Psychological Sciences 

Swinburne University of Technology 

3.  School of Psychology 

The University of Queensland 

Corresponding author : Timothy Gastrell,  t.gastrell@uq.edu.au 

Acknowledgements: The authors wish to thank Douglas Cribb for assistance with data 

collection and Henry Beale for helpful advice on analys is. T his work was supported by a 

grant from the Australian Research Council to JBM and DR (DP220104008). JBM was 

supported by an Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) 

Leadership (L3) Investigator Grant (GNT2010141) .

Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare no competing financial interest s.

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

Abstract 

Adaptive perceptual decision -making relies on the ability to combine sensory 

evidence with prior expectations in a precision -weighted manner. Although Bayesian 

inference provides a clear normative account of how such integration should occur, the neural 

me chanisms through which the brain represents and combines prior s and likelihood s remain 

poorly understood. Across two preregistered experiments, we investigated how the precision 

of prior expectations and sensory likelihoods influences visual motion judgements and 

associated neural activity patterns during a random -dot motion estimation task. Neurotypical 

adult p articipants (N= 80 , 58 female) reported directions of visual motion stimuli, with motion 

coherence varying randomly across trials. Prior expectations were manipulated block -wise by 

varying the probabilities with which different motion directions were prese nted. Consistent 

with precision -weighted inference , response accuracy improved as coherence increased with 

robust response biases toward the expected motion direction . Neural activity measured using 

electroencephalography (EEG) revealed reliable effects of prior expectation on the univariate 

centr al -parietal positivity (CPP) , consistent with reduced accumulation of sensory evidence 

under informative priors . Multivariate analysis using inverted -encoding model s revealed 

robust effects of prior informativeness on motion -specific neural representations , but only 

late, during response planning stages . Together, these findings demonstrate that 

precision -weighted inference primarily occurs at late stages of the decision process and 

challeng e predictive -processing accounts that emphasise early sensory processing .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

Significance Statement 

Perceptual decisions require combining uncertain sensory information with prior 

expectations about what is likely to occur. Although behaviour often follows this principle, it 

remains unclear how the brain integrates prior expectations with incoming sensory evidence. 

Using a visual motion task and concurrent brain imaging , we show that expectations do not 

alter early sensory processing but instead influence later stages of decision formation and 

action planning. Neural representations of sensory evidence pr imarily reflect stimulus 

reliability, whereas prior expectations selectively enhance representations during response 

preparation. These findings challenge influential theories proposing that expectations affect 

early sensory processing and instead highlight their contribution to later decision -related 

processes. This work advances understanding of how the brain uses experience to optimise 

perceptual decisions under uncertainty. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

Introduction 

Adaptive interaction with the environment requires making perceptual decisions in the 

face of uncertainty. The Bayesian inference framework offers a principled account of how 

such decisions are mediated ; the brain combines sensory evidence with prior expectations to 

infer the most likely state of the world (Gold & Stocker, 2017; Körding & Wolpert, 2004; Ma 

et al., 2023; Weiss et al., 2002) . Importantly, this combination is not a simple average .

Instead, the contribution of each source of information is weighted by its precision . Despite 

its success in describing behaviour, however, it remains unclear how precision -weighted 

integration is achieved in the brain . We investigated this question across two preregistered 

experiments where adult human participants learned to use priors to guide their choices while 

we recorded their brain activity using electroencephalography (EEG). 

Under accumulate -to -bound models such as drift -diffusion (Ratcliff & McKoon, 

2008) , prior s for choice alternatives are integrated into the decision process as response bias 

in favour of the more likely alternative (Mulder et al., 2012; Summerfield & de Lange, 2014) .

Neural evidence for this bias has been identified in increased preparatory motor activity in 

both human s and non -human animals (Basso & Wurtz, 1997; De Lange et al., 2013; Kelly et 

al., 2021; Rao et al., 2012; Walsh et al., 2024) . However, recent accounts suggest that prior s

also increase the rate at which evidence is accumulated by directly impacting representations 

of expected stimuli (Diaz et al., 2024; Kelly et al., 2021; Walsh et al., 2024) . Under this view, 

the brain utilise s prior expectations by proactively modulating neural populations tuned to the 

expected stimul us values (de Lange et al., 2018; Press et al., 2020; Summerfield & de Lange, 

2014) . Exami nations of population -level neural activity patterns show that stimulus 

representations can be bias ed toward expected values (Kok et al., 2013; Park et al., 2023) and 

are increasingly precise the closer they are to the expected value (Kok et al., 2012; Yon et al., 

2018) . Moreover, e arly neural responses associated with an expected stimulus can occur 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

when no stimulus is presented (Kok et al., 2014; Todorovic & de Lange, 2012) , and may even 

be activated before a stimulus appears (Aitken et al., 2020; Blom et al., 2020; Feuerriegel, 

Blom, et al., 2021; Kok et al., 2017) . These findings point to an early modulation of sensory 

representations by prior s, consistent with influential predictive processing theories (de Lange 

et al., 2018; Press et al., 2020; Summerfield & de Lange, 2014; Walsh et al., 2020) .

Despite these advances , it remains unclear whether the influence of prior expectation 

on neural stimulus representation s scales with the precision of that prior . Moreover, it 

remains unknown whether such effects interact with sensory precision , thereby 

approximati ng Bayesian inference at the level of neural representation . We addressed these 

question s in two preregistered experiments where participants learned and used priors to 

guide choices in a random -dot motion estimation task. Using a factorial design we 

parametrically manipulated the precision of prior expect ations and sensory signals , and 

evaluated their effects on behaviour al error distributions . Capitalising on the high temporal 

resolution of EEG combined with multivariate population tuning analys es, we characterised 

how and when neural representations of motion direction are impacted by prior and 

likelihood precision . If, as suggested by predictive processing models (de Lange et al., 2018; 

Press et al., 2020; Walsh et al., 2020) , priors are integrated into the decision process by either 

sharpening or biasing the encoding of decision -relevant stimuli, then increasing the precision 

of priors should increase the accuracy and/or bias of neural representations decoded from 

EEG. This e ffect should arise at early timepoints around stimulus onset and be at least as 

strong as expectation effects on representations later in the trial. Finally, if these processes 

underl ie the approximation of Bayesian inference regularly observed in behaviou ral studies 

(Chalk et al., 2010; Körding & Wolpert, 2004) , then expectations should interact with 

stimulus precision such that they exert the strongest influence when the stimulus is least 

precise. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

Materials & Methods 

Participants 

Forty -three volunteers participated in the behavio ural experiment (Experiment 1). 

Two did not finish the task, and one was excluded for poor task performance (see 

Behavioural Analyses ) resulting in a final sample size of 40 participants for Experiment 1 (33 

female, 37 right -handed, 18 – 38 years ). Another 43 volunteers participated in the EEG 

experiment (Experiment 2). One volunteer withdrew after the first EEG session and two were 

excluded for poor task performance , leaving a final sample of 40 participant s in Experiment 2 

(25 female, 38 right -handed, 18 – 37 years) . All participants self -reported normal or 

corrected -to -normal vision , provided written informed consent and were compensated $20 

AUD per hour for their time . The sample size of N = 40 per experiment is consistent with 

previous work from our group that used similar tasks and analysis techniques  (Rangelov et 

al., 2021, 2024; Rangelov & Mattingley, 2020) . The study was approved by The University 

of Queensland Human Research Ethics Committee ( HE001494). Both experiments were pre -

registered with the Open Science Framework (Experiment 1 : osf.io/s7d59 ; Experiment 2: 

osf.io/pt82w ). 

Stimuli, task & procedure 

Noisy motion signals were generated using a random dot -motion stimulus. The 

stimulus comprised 200 white dots (0.05 degrees radius) pseudo -randomly distributed around 

a yellow fixation point (0.05 degrees radius) within a circular aperture (8 degrees radius) 

against a black background. Dot positions were updated every frame to generate apparent 

motion. The direction of motion for each dot was sampled randomly and independently from 

a von Mises distribution (circular Gaussian) defined by a mean (μ s) and a pr ecision parameter 

(κ s). The precision of motion information available in the stimulus was manipulated by 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

varying κs, between high (0.4) and low (0.2) in Experiment 1 (Figure 1 B). Dot speed was 

held constant at 3 degrees visual angle (dva) per second. Dots had an infinite lifetime and 

were  wrapped around if they left the stimulus aperture. 

Figure 1. Overview of the task and the manipulation of stimulus and prior precision. A) Structure of a single trial from pre -

fixation to response. Note: trial diagram is schematic only, colours and scale differ from actual design (see Methods). B)

Stimulus precision was manipulated via motion coherence, corresponding to the precision of the sampling distribution of 

possible dot -directions on each frame. Zero corresponds to the global target motion direction . C) Priors for motion direction 

were manipulated via the block -level sampling distribution for global tar get motion directions. These distributions could 

either be completely uninformative (uniform) or contain some information about the probability of upcoming stimulus 

values . In this case zero corresponds to the central tendency of the block -wise sampling distribution/prior .

To manipulate priors, the global motion signal (i.e ., the target) on each trial was 

sampled from a block -level hyper -distribution , which was also a von Mises distribution but 

defined by a different mean ( μp) and precision (κ p; Figure 1 C). Each participant learned 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

priors for three motion directions (μp) separated by 120 degrees. Priors were either 

uninformative ( κp = 0, effectively uniform), weakly informative ( κp = 5) or strongly 

informative ( κp = 10) . These hyperparameters varied across blocks and counterbalanced such 

that participants experienced every combination of μp and κp twice, yet no two consecutive 

blocks shared a value of μ p. Between participants, μp angle s were adjusted by a small amount 

to ensure even sampling around the full circle at the group level .

Each p articipant completed 18 blocks of 60 trials . Each trial (see Figure 1A ) began 

with a fixation point (500 ms) , followed by a dot -display containing only random motion (κs

= 0) . After a variable period of 600 -850 ms , the target motion direction was presented for 750 

ms before motion returned to random for a final 100 ms . Participants were instructed to 

estimate the target motion direction within 3000 ms using an on -screen response dial 

presented at fixation. The dial comprised a black circle with a red outline (4 degrees radius) 

and a yellow ‘arm’ allowing 360 degrees of movement around the circle . The initial angl e of 

the arm on each trial was randomly sampled from a uniform distribution of values ranging 

from -π to π radians so participants could not start planning a response before the onset of the 

response display .

The main aim of Experiment 2 was to characterize the neural correlates of sensory 

processing and decision -making using both univariate and multivariate analyses of brain 

activity measured using EEG . Aside from the minor departures mentioned below , the 

protocol for Experiment 2 was identical to that of Experiment 1 . To accommodate the extra 

statistical power required for multivariate EEG analysis, participants in Experiment 2 

completed 2160 trials (36 blocks) spread over two sessions. Since participants had more 

exposure to the prior statistics in Experiment 2, we rotated the values of μ p 60 by degrees 

between sessions 1 and 2. In addition, we introduced a ‘high’ motion coherence condition (κs

= 2.0 ) which introduced strong motion -selective neural responses that were subsequently 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

used for training the EEG decoding models . Experiment 2 therefore had three levels of 

motion coherence (0.2, 0.4 and 2.0; “ low ”, “ medium ” and “high ” coherence , respectively ).

Since we planned to train decoding models on high coherence trials from the uninformative 

prior condition, we wanted to avoid the possibility that these models might become biased 

because of spuriou s failures of randomization during sampling . To eliminate this possibility, 

we changed the way motion directions were selected in the uninformative -prior condition (κp

= 0) such that target directions were now drawn without replacement from a pre -determined 

set of 60 evenly spaced directions spanning the full circle .

Apparatus 

The experiment s were conducted in a dark room using a Dell Precision T1700 

computer with either a 32” Display++ LCD monitor (Cambridge Research Systems Ltd., 

Rochester, UK) (Experiment 1) or a 24” ASUS VG248 ( ASUSTeK Computer Inc. , Taiwan )

(Experiment 2). Both displays had a 1920*1080 -pixel resolution and a 120 Hz refresh rate. 

Stimuli were generated using custom Python code (Python version 3.8.10) using the 

PsychoPy toolbox (v2021.1.3;  Peirce et al., 2019) . EEG signals were recorded using 64 Ag -

AgCl electrodes (Active Three , BioSemi) arranged in the 10 -20 layout and sampled at 1024 

Hz .

Behavioural Analyses 

To remove any influence of pre -emptive responding, we removed trials with response 

times shorter than 200 ms . Trials where the participant did not response within 3000 ms were 

also removed . Per our preregistered criteria , two participants for whom more than 20% of the 

total trial count were removed for the above reasons were excluded from Experiment 2 .

Fewer than 0.1% of trials were removed from the remaining sample in either experiment . We 

also set a generous lower bound on acceptable task performance; participants were only 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

excluded from analysis if the circular standard deviation of response errors was greater than π 

/ 2 radians . One participant was excluded from Experiment 1 for this reason. 

We characterized behavioural performance in the estimation task by examin ing 

histogram s of response errors per participant across experimental condition s. Errors were 

calculated via circular subtraction of veridical motion directions from response s. Response 

accuracy for each trial was quantified using the absolute magnitude of errors subtracted from 

one. Bias toward a learned prior was quantified by re -coding the sign (+/ -) of errors such that 

those made toward μp became positive, and those away became neg ative. We term this 

operationalisation of bias the signed error. Attractive bias toward μp is thus captured by a 

positive shift in the circular mean of the distribution of signed error s.

EEG Analyses 

EEG signals were processed in Python (version 3.12.7) using the MNE analysis 

toolbox  (version 1.8.0; Larson et al., 2024) . The data were referenced offline to the average 

electrode, band -pass filtered between 0.2 Hz and 40 Hz and notch filtered at 50 Hz to 

eliminate line noise. Signals were then epoched between -0.95 s and 2.0 s relative to onset of 

the motion signal, baselined relative to the average signal during a 100ms period of random 

motion ( -0.35 s to -0.25 s) pr ior to target onset and down -sampled to 256 Hz . The baseline 

period was selected to minimize the possibility of artifacts introduced by anticipation of 

target mo tion -onset which may have resulted from the variable duration of pre -target random 

motion . The epoched data were next submitted to an automated preprocessing pipeline for 

artefact detection and correction using the FASTER algorithm  (Nolan et al., 2010) . Between 

26 and 100 trials per participant were identified as EEG outliers and removed from further 

analyses (median = 61 trials) .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

Decision -relevant a ccumulat e-to -bound dynamics have previously been observed in 

event -related build -ups in positive voltage over central and parietal cortices  (O’Connell et al., 

2012) . To analyse these centro -parietal positivity (CPP) dy namics , w e extracted motion -

locked event -related potentials by averag ing over a cluster of 5 electrodes at the center of the 

head (Cz, CPz, Pz, CP1 & CP2) – align ing with scalp positions reported in previous studies 

of perceptual decision -making  (O’Connell et al., 2012; Rangelov & Mattingley, 2020; Stone 

et al., 2024) .

We used two distinct computational approaches to model feature -specific information 

about motion direction in terms of participants’ EEG activity . First, we characterize d the 

sensitivity of individual electrodes to different motion directions by estimating the linear 

relatio nship between motion direction and electrode voltage . Using Equation 1, we regressed 

the voltage V from electrode i and time sample t against the sine and cosine transform of the 

presented motion direction θ using a general linear mixed -effects model which allowed 

random intercepts u per participant ID j.

𝑉 𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽 0 + 𝛽 1 sin (𝜃 ) + 𝛽 2 cos (𝜃 ) + 𝑢 𝑗 + 𝜀 𝑖𝑡  (1)

We then indexed motion sensitivity S of electrode i at time t as the vector length 

defined by the fitted β values for each term (Equation 2). 

𝑆 𝑖𝑡 = √𝛽 21 + 𝛽 22 (2)

Since S was always positive, we permuted this analysis 1 ,000 times with shuffled 

values of θ to generate an empirical null distribution from which we could estimate a p -value 

for every electrode and timepoint . We restricted this analysis to high motion coherence trials 

from blocks where the prior was uniform t o ensure comparability with the multivariate 

inverted -encoding analysis , as described below. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

In a second analysis , we employed an inverted -encoding model to characterize 

multivariate patterns of feature -specific neural responses across the entire electrode 

population  (Brouwer & Heeger, 2009; Kok et al., 2017; Rangelov et al., 2021) . Briefly, t his 

technique uses ordinary least squares to map multivariate EEG sensor activity to hypothetical 

motion -tuned channel responses ( i.e., estimating a forward model), then inverts this mapping 

to recover population -tuning profiles from held -out data. 

Consistent with previous work using motion stimuli  (Rangelov et al., 2021) , the 

forward model comprised 16 hypothetical motion -responsive channels, with evenly 

distributed tuning preferences between –π and π radians. Each channel consisted of a half -

wave rectified sinusoid raised to the fifth power. Hypothesized motion tuning for each target 

direction could then be expressed as the weighted circular sum of the 16 channels. EEG 

activity for each stimulus presentation could thus be described using the linear model 

expressed in Equation 3:

𝐵 = 𝑊𝐶 + 𝐸  (3)

Where B represents the EEG data as a m sensors x n trials matrix, W is a m sensors x 

16 motion channel weight matrix that describes the transformation from EEG activity to 

motion direction, C indicates the hypothesized channel activities (16 motion channels x n

trials), and E is the residual term. 

To compute the inverse model , which takes EEG sensor activity back to motion 

channel activations, we estimated weight s that reproduce d the hypothesized channel activities 

with the least error via ordinary least squares optimization . Using a procedure described in 

previous work  (Aitken et al., 2020; Kok et al., 2017; Rideaux et al., 2023) , we accounted for 

highly correlated EEG sensor activity by incorporating noise -covariance into the weight 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

estimation procedure, regularized using an analytically determined optimal shrinkage 

parameter  (Ledoit & Wolf, 2004) .

We conducted this analysis across trials for each participant and time sample. 

However, b ecause the structure of our experimental task involved non -uniform sampling of 

motion directions, we estimated the inverse models only on trials sampled from a uniform 

distribution and presented with high motion coherence . We then used these models to recover 

motion tuning in the other conditions. Selectively splitting trials into these training and 

testing sets meant that tuning properties recovered from held -out data only reflect properties 

of the neural stimulus representations, rather than factors arising from non -uniform sampling .

Since these training trials also served as an important control condition in our inferential 

analys es, we additionally estimated their motion tuning using a leave -one -out cross validation 

procedure. 

To decode the stimulus direction represented in EEG activity on each trial, we used an 

aggregate index of the channel response profile by computing the dot product of the 16 

recovered channel activities with their respective complex -valued motion tuning preferences .

The angle of the resulting vector reflects the decoded motion direction , and the vector length 

provide s an estimate of the single trial tuning width . We then quantified s ingle -trial accuracy 

as the cosine of the neural error magnitude, expressed as the difference between the decoded 

direction and the stimulus direction (the same as behavioural errors) . A n a ccuracy score of 1 

indicate s perfect decoding and a score of 0 indicates chance. Next, we calculated neural bias 

by applying the same sign -flipping procedure previously described for behavioural response 

errors to the recovered ne ural error s.

We also examine d whether stimulus representations were stable across time , and 

whether the representations that were active during encodin g of coherent motion might also 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

extend to time periods either before or after the period where coherent motion information 

was physically present ed to the participant . These analyses involved a temporal 

generalization approach whereby inverse models obtained at each timepoint from the training 

set were applied at every other timepoint during the trial . This approach permitted us to create 

two -dimensional matrices of decoding accuracy for each experimental condition  (King & 

Dehaene, 2014; Kok et al., 2017; Mostert et al., 2015) .

Experimental Design & Statistical Analys es

The main independent variables were stimulus precision (κs = 0.2, 0.4 and 2.0) and 

prior precision ( κp = 0, 5 and 10) , resulting in 2x3 and 3x3 within -subject design s for 

Experiments 1 and 2 , respectively. Statistical analyses for behavioural accuracy and bias were 

performed at the single -trial level using mixed -effects general linear models implemented 

with the stats models package in Python (stats models version 0.14.4 ; Seabold & Perktold, 

2010) . Each model included fixed -effect predictors of stimulus precision (κs) and prior 

precision ( κp) and their interaction , while allowing random intercepts across participan ts:

𝐷𝑉 ~ 1 + 𝜅 𝑠 ∗ 𝜅 𝑝 + (1|Participant _ID )

Time -resolved statistical analyses of neural data (CPP amplitude, decoding accuracy 

and bias) were similarly performed at the single -trial leve l using the same approach repeated 

for each timepoint . In this case t he estimated parameters were assessed for statistical 

significance against 0 using the false discovery rate to control for inflation of false -positive 

probability due to multiple comparisons  (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995) . Post -hoc contrasts 

between experimental conditions involved one -sample t -tests of difference scores against 

zero, corrected for multiple comparisons using cluster -based permutation -tests (p < .01 

cluster admission threshold ; clusters with p < .05 after 1000 permutations are reported ). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

Results 

Motion Percept ion Reflects a Precision -Weighted Inference Strategy 

Response errors in Experiment 1 were unimodal and clustered around zero , indicating 

good task performance at each level of stimulus precision ( Figure 2A ). As expected, 

response accuracy increased in step with stimulus precision (main effect of precision: β =

1.37, SE = 0.038, t(42898 ) = 36.25, p < 0.001, Figure 2B ). 

Figure 2. Results o f Experiment 1 ( Behavioural experiment ). Trial -level error histograms for each level of stimulus 

precision. B) Response accuracy stratified by stimulus precision and prior precision. C) Response bias stratified by stimulus 

precision and prior precision . Bias expressed as mean signed -error magnitude s such tha t attraction to the central -tendency 

of the current prior is captured by a positive shift in the error distribution. D) Bias stratified by stimulus precision and time 

within the session grouped into three equal -sized bins . Here, time reflects t he exposure participants had to each of the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16           

> priors. For visualisation, the d ata used to construct boxplots were normalised to remove the between subjects’ variability
> (Cousineau, 2005) .Inset bar plots indicate t -statistics and significance of mixed GLM parameter estimates . * = p < .05 .

There was also a comparatively small, but statistically significant, main effect of prior 

precision such that stronger priors resulted in more accurate responses ( β = 0.012, SE =

0.002, t(42898 ) = 6.42, p < 0.001). Importantly, the interaction between stimulus and prior 

precision was significant ( β = -0.03, SE = 0.006, t(42898 ) = -5.19, p < 0.001) , such that the 

improvement in accuracy afforded by a stronger prior was more pronounced for the least 

precise coherent motion stimul i.

Response bias analyses revealed attractive biases toward expected motion directions 

(i.e., positive shifts) with stronger priors yielding stronger attractive biases (β = 0.013 , SE =

0.0 03, t(42898 ) = 4.93 , p < 0.001 , Figure 2C ). There was no main effect of stimulus 

precision on response bias. Consistent with our preregistered hypotheses , the effect of prior 

precision significantly interacted with stimulus precision (β = -0.029 , SE = 0.0 08, t(42898 ) = 

-3.44 , p < 0.01 ) such that attraction toward the prior was maximal when the stimulus was 

weakest and the prior strongest. 

Next, we asked how priors were learned and maintained over the course of a 

behavioural session. Though the prior in each block was always different to that of the 

previous block, three central tendencies (i.e., prior mean;  μp) were repeated throughout each 

session . We might expect, therefore, that response biases should be stronger in later, relative 

to earlier blocks given participants ' increased exposure to the prior . To explore this question, 

we divided the data into three sets depending on whether they were early, in the middle or 

late within each experimental session , and then modelled bias as a function of stimulus 

precision and time bin (i.e., prior exposure) . This analysis revealed that biases did indeed 

increase significantly with greater exposure to the prior (β = 0.045, SE = 0.013, t(42898 ) = 

3.45, p < 0.01 ; Figure 2D ). Exposure to the prior also significantly interacted with stimulus 

precision in both experiments such that the strongest biases emerged when stimulus precision 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

was low ( β = -0.090, SE = 0.042, t(42898 ) = -2.15, p < 0.05), suggesting participants 

weighted priors more heavily after prolonged exposure. 

Experiment 2 served as a replication of the behavioural results of Experiment 1, but 

now with neural activity recorded concurrently via EEG. We replicated e ach of the key 

behavioural effects in Experiment 2 (Figure 3 ): response accuracy was significantly 

predicted by both stimulus (β = 0.199, SE = 0.003, t(85521 ) = 67.16, p < .001 ) and prior 

precision (β = 0.006, SE = 0.001, t(85521 ) = 11.6, p < 0.001 ) and by their interaction (β = -

0.003, SE < 0.001, t(85521 ) = -6.75, p < 0.001 ; Figure 3B ) such that responses to the 

weakest stimuli were most improved under stronger priors. Similarly, the magnitude of 

response biases were predicted by the precision of the learned prior ( β = 0.003, SE = 0.001, 

t(85521 ) = 4.73, p < 0.001 ) and its interaction with stimulus precision ( β = -0.003, SE =

0.001, t(85521 ) = -4.37, p < 0.001 ; Figure 3C ). Once again, we found that blocks later in 

each experimental session exhibited greater biases relative to those toward the beginning (β =

0.023, SE = 0.004, t(85521 ) = 5.80, p < 0.001; Figure 3D ) indicating priors played an 

increased role in decision for mation as they were learned over time . Exposure to the task 

statistics also interacted with stimulus precision (β = -0.008, SE = 0.003, t(85521 ) = -2.44, p

< 0.05) suggesting priors were weighted more heavily as familiarity with them increased and 

as stimulus precision decreased .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

Figure 3 . Behavioural results for Experiment 2 (EEG + Behaviour). A) Trial -level error histograms for each level of 

stimulus precision. B) Response accuracy stratified by stimulus precision and prior precision. C) Response bias stratified by 

stimulus precision and prior precision. Bias expressed as mean signed -error magnitudes such that attraction to the central -

tendency of the current prior is captured by a positive shift in the error distribution. D) Bias stratified by stimulus precision 

and time within the sessi on grouped into three equal -sized bins. Here, time reflects the exposure participants had to each of 

the priors. For visualisation, the data used to construct boxplots were normalised to remove the between subjects’ variabilit y

(Cousineau, 2005) . Inset bar plots indicate t -statistics and significance of mixed GLM parameter estimates. * = p < .05. 

Taken together, the behavioural results of Experiments 1 and 2 are consistent with a 

precision -weighted Bayesian inference strategy whereby observers optimize their decision -

making by integrating probabilistic representations of the sensory input with expectations 

about the task. Importantly, the robust interactions found between precision of motion signals 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

and informativeness of priors strongly suggest that observers utilize the precision of their 

prior expectations , as well as that of the available sensory evidence , when making decisions 

about motion direction. 

Priors and Likelihoods Differentially Influence Neural Signature s of Evidence 

Accumulation 

Having established that participants ’ decision -making behaviour was sensitive to both 

the reliability of sensory evidence and learned prior s, we next examin ed the associated 

patterns of brain activity, as reflected in the central parietal positivity (CPP) component of 

participants’ EEG signals , a well -studied neural correlate of decision -making . Previous work 

has established that t he CPP track s accumulated sensory evidence relevant to an upcoming 

decision regardless of the sensory modality involved (O’Connell et al., 2012) . In our task, the 

CPP followed the expected time course of evidence accumulation , featuring a ramping of 

neural activity ~ 200 ms after the onset of coherent motion which peaked between 300 and 

400 ms depending on the strength of sensory evidence (Figure 4A ). These observations were 

supported by time -resolved linear modelling which revealed a strong effect of stimulus 

precision such that CPP amplitudes increased markedly in step with stimulus precision 

(Figure 4C). This result is in line with previous work showing that the CCP is sensitive to the 

amount of evidence available in the target for decision -making (Kelly & O’Connell, 2013; 

Rangelov et al., 2021; Stone et al., 2024) , and suggests that the rate of evidence accumulation 

in the visual motion task was facilitated by stimulus precision. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

Figure 4. Mean motion -locked central parietal positivity (CPP) recorded during the 750 ms period of coherent motion. Plots 

are stratified by A) motion coherence and B) prior precision. Shaded regions reflect the within -participant standard erro r of 

the mean. Vertical red lines and grey dashed lines indicate coherent motion onset , and offset , respectively . Black solid, 

dashed and dotted lines indicate cluster significance p < .05 of pairwise condition comparisons. C) Log -transformed p 

values for fixed effects of stimulus and prior precisions and their interaction on CPP amplitude , presented on a log scale .

Horizontal dashes indicate the log -transformed significance threshold . For the purposes of presentation, e ach trace was 

smoothed using a temporal Gaussian filter (sigm a = 4) . All statistical comparisons were performed on the unsmoothed data. 

We also observed a small and transient , but significant effect of prior precision on 

CPP amplitude , whereby neural responses under informative priors ( κp = 5  & κp = 10) were 

reduced relative to the uniform prior condition (κp = 0 ; Figure 4B). This finding suggests that 

the brain accumulates less evidence when stimulus values are predict able compared with 

when they are random , consistent with the accumulate -to -bound decision -making framework .

Here, a non -uniform prior over potential decision outcome s shifts the starting poi nt of 

evidence accumulation in favor of more likely target values . This shift ultimately results in an 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

imbalance in the amount of evidence accumulation necessary to trigger the favored decision .

The slope of the CPP is frequently found to be proportionate to the quality of sensory 

evidence , i.e., the stimulus representation  (Kelly & O’Connell, 2013; Rangelov et al., 2021; 

Stone et al., 2024) , an effect clearly reflected in the gradation of slopes when stratifying CPP 

waveforms by motion coherence (Figure 4A ). However, t his same pattern was not apparent 

when splitting the CPP by the strength of the learned prior (Figure 4B ), suggesting little or 

no influence of a prior on the quality of evidence being sampled. 

Feature Specific Decoding Analyses 

To test whether prior expectations affected the neural representation of motion 

direction during the task , we undertook two analyses that quantif ied the spatiotemporal 

dynamics and representational fidelity of motion -specific stimulus information. Time -

resolved l inear modelling of single -electrode activities revealed a posterior -anterior 

progression of motion -selective information across the sc alp as participants observed and 

then acted upon the motion stimulus (Figure 5 A). Motion -direction information was initially 

present over central and posterior areas (~400 ms post stimulus) before progressing into 

central and frontal areas toward the end of the observation period (~700 ms) . Early during the 

response period (~1000 ms), motion -direction information was evident over nearly all 

electrode sites including over posterior areas , consistent with maintenance (or re -activation )

of sensory representations during decision -formation and response . Late activity in the lead -

up to the response (average response time ~ 1800 ms) was bilaterally localised over frontal 

electrode sites. Importantly, while participants were instructed to maintain fixation and keep 

their response hand still during stimulus observation, they were free to make saccades and 

move the computer mouse during the response period . It is thus possible these later signals 

reflect stimulus -correlated motor -activity as well as stimulus -specific neural activity .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

Figure 5. Motion -specific neural responses to coherent motion signals. A) Individual electrode sensitivity to motion 

information. Here, m otion sensitivity is expressed as negative log transformed p -values, corrected for multiple comparisons 

using the false discovery rate over both time and electrode dimensions. Electrode sites highlighted by triangles indicate p FDR 

< .05. B) Time course of neural tuning to motion direction derived from the inverted -encoding analysis. Motion tuning is 

expressed as average decoding ac curacy during observation of coherent motion (left panel) and response (right panel; note 

the different y -axis scale). Shaded regions indicate the group -level standard error, and the black line denotes clusters where 

accuracy is significantly above chance level (horizontal grey dashes). Coloured vertical bar (dashed) in the response panel 

corresponds to the mean group -level response time with the grey bar denoting standard error. C) Temporal generalisation 

decoding matrix averaged over all condition combina tions. Pixel values correspond to t -statistics describing difference 

between decoding accuracy and chance. White contours denote cluster significance following 10000 permutations. As 

above, Gaussian smoothing was applied to time series for plotting only. 

In a second analysis , we trained inverted encoding model s to characterise the 

dynamics of motion -tuning throughout the decision -process from whole -scalp EEG activity .

We expressed the strength of neural representations within each condition as the aggregated 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

accuracy of the decoded motion directions on each trial . As depicted in Figure 5B , stimulus 

motion was robustly decoded from approximately 200 ms post stimulus onset through to (and 

beyond) the average response time (~ 1800ms) . Temporal generalisation analysis confirmed 

that a fter an initial ramping -up of motion -specific activity , th e representation encoded during 

observation of coherent motion was maintained well into the response period (see Figure 5C ;

persistent decoding cluster including off diagonal ex tension from testing at ~30 0 ms through 

to ~ 1200 ms) .

Next , we ask ed whether neural tuning to motion direction at each timepoint was 

affected by our manipulations of stimulus and prior precision . Trial -level linear mixed -effects 

modelling and pairwise comparison of the decoding accuracy time series revealed robust 

differences in the precision of neural representations as a function of stimulus precision 

during both observation of the coherent motion target and response generation (Figure 6 A).

The difference s during motion observation mirror the order observed in the univariate CPP 

data ( Figure 4A ), corroborating our interpretation that the quality of evidence accumulated is 

proportionate to the robustness of participants’ representation of the stimulus . Importantly ,

motion tuning during this motion observation period was not modulated by the precision of 

the prior (Figure 6 B), reinforc ing the interpretation that recently learned priors impact the 

starting point of the decision process, rather than directly impacting the encoding of sensory 

evidence . In contrast, prior precision did significantly influ ence motion tuning during the 

response period ; decoding accuracy from ~1000 -1700 ms increased in step with the reliability 

of the current prior, suggesting that representations of stimuli are enhanced according to their 

prior probability during decision -making and action preparation .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

Figure 6. Neural tuning to motion direction expressed as decoding accuracy stratified by A) stimulus precision and B) prior 

precision during the observation and response periods (note the difference y -axis scales) . Vertical red lines and grey dashed 

lines indicate coherent motion onset, and offset, respectively. Black solid, dashed and dotted lines indicate cluster 

significance p < .05 of pairwise condition comparisons. C) Log -transformed p values for fixed effects of stimulus and prior 

precisions and thei r interaction on decoding accuracy. Horizontal dashes indicate the log -transformed significance 

threshold. For the purposes of presentation, each trace was smoothed using a temporal Gaussian filter (sigma = 4). All 

statistical comparisons were performed on the unsmoothed data. 

Bayesian decision -theory dictates that the best strategy for minimising errors is to 

make estimates that are biased toward the central tendency of the prior (with the degree of 

bias weighted by the respective precisions of the prior and sensory likelihood (Körding & 

Wolpert, 2004; Ma et al., 2023) ). Since we observed such biases in the behavioural data 

(Figure 3C ), we might expect that the largest impact of a strong prior should be to shift the 

value of the represented motion direction in its favour . To investigate this possibility, we 

quantified neural bias at the trial -level using the same method as for behavioural bias by 

recoding the error sign to reflect prior attraction . No systematic shift s in the represented 

motion direction were observed with respect to the prior in either the observation or response 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

periods suggesting that , on average, motion representations faithfully tracked the presented 

target direction even once the stimulus was n o longer visible (see Figure S1 ).

The analyses reported so far reveal robust differences in the fidelity of motion -

specific patterns of brain activity as a function of the precision of both stimuli and learned 

priors during response preparation and execution ( Figure 6 ). While the effect of stimulus 

precision is already apparent during observation of the coherent motion target , the effect of 

prior precision only emerge d later during the response period . To respond , participants 

rotated an on -screen dial to match their representation of the target direction requiring them 

to concurrently maint ain their representation of the target while planning and executing their 

response . Given that any target -aligned response in this task necessarily reflects the target 

direction , could the effect of priors be explained by response -related , rather than feature –

specific , activity ?

Figure 7. A) Decoding models trained during coherent motion observation reproduce the effect of prior precision when 

cross -generalised to the response period. Vertical red lines and grey dashed lines indicate coherent motion onset, and offset, 

respectively. Black solid, dashed and dotted lines indicate cluster significance p < .05 of pairwise condition comparisons. B)

Log -transformed p values for fixed effect of precision of prior expectation on decoding accuracy. Horizontal dashes indicate 

the log -transformed significance threshold. For the purposes of presentation, each trace was smoothed using a temporal 

Gaussian filter (sigma = 4). All statistical comparisons were performed on the unsmooth ed data. 

Participants were instructed to keep the mouse still until the response dial was 

presented . T herefore, decoding models trained during the observation period should be free 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

from any influence of overt motor activity. We hypothesise d, therefore, that if the effect of 

priors reflects modulation of motor activity , then it should be abolished when applying 

models trained only on stimulus -driven activity to unseen data recorded from the response 

period. To assess this possibility , we performed an exploratory temporal generalisation 

analysis using inverted encoding models trained between 250 and 750 ms after coheren t

motion onset , to recover motion information at every timepoint in held -out data . These time 

samples were selected for training since they compris ed the approximate period over which 

robust decoding was observed at the group -level before motion offset (see Figure 5B ). We 

then collapsed across the training time points to produce a single time -resolved measure of 

motion tuning for each le vel of prior precision (Figure 7 ). Consistent with the hypothesis 

outlined above , the effect of prior precision in the response period persisted , suggesting that 

enhanced neural tuning to the target direction under stronger priors reflects stimulus , rather 

than response -driven activity. Interestingly, feature -tuned information quickly decayed to 

chance levels under an uninformative prior , whereas similar activity under informative prior s

diminished more slowl y.

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

Discussion 

Bayesian inference offers an elegant normative framework for describing perceptual 

decision s (Gold & Stocker, 2017; Ma et al., 2023) . However, t he degree to which neural 

representation s of stimuli reflect these Bayesian computations remains unclear. Here, we 

focussed on the principle of precision -weighting – the notion that optima l decisions should 

combine priors and likelihoods, weighted by their respective precision – in a s imple motion -

estimation task. Using parametric manipulation of both likelihood and prior precision across 

two experiments, we found that behavioural reports demonstrate the hallmarks of precision -

weighted inference: specifically, response accuracy reflected the combined precision of priors 

and sensory likelihoods , and the degree to which responses were biased toward the most 

likely stimulus values depended on the relative precision s of the likelihood and prior . These 

results are in line with previous empirical findings (Chalk et al., 2010; Körding & Wolpert, 

2004; Rangelov et al., 2021) and suggest that the brain keeps track of task statistics and 

deploys this knowledge to optimise simple decision s in a statistically principled way (de 

Lange et al., 2018; Fiser et al., 2010; Summerfield & de Lange, 2014) . But at what point/s are 

task priors integrated into the decision process? 

Computational work using abstract accumulate -to -bound decision models ha s

suggested that decision -biases most often result from changes to either the starting point or 

rate of evidence accumulation , each mechanism reducing the number of evidence samples 

necessary to trigger a decision in favour of the preferred outcome (Mulder et al., 2012; 

Ratcliff & McKoon, 2008; Summerfield & de Lange, 2014) . A shift in the starting point for 

evidence accumulation may result from pre -existing e vidence for stimulus values wit h a high 

prior probability relative to alternatives , whereas increasing the rate of accumulation implies 

an improvement in the quality of evidence being sampled , e.g., by sharpening perceptual 

representations when more probable stimuli are encountered. The continuous nature of our 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

motion -estimation task does not lend itself to typical accumulate -to -bound sequential 

decision model ling , so instead we capitalised on the high temporal resolution of EEG to 

quantify the CPP, a well -established neural correlate of supr amodal evidence -accumulation 

(O’Connell et al., 2012) . Analysis of the CPP waveform as a function of stimulus precision 

revealed much faster ramping activity for high relative to low precision stimuli , replicating 

previous reports (Kelly & O’Connell, 2013; Rangelov et al., 2021; Rungratsameetaweemana 

et al., 2018; Stone et al., 2024) . No clear gradation of ramping activity was observed when 

stratifying by the precision of prior expectations . Instead, stimuli drawn from a n informative 

prior distribution elicited CPPs that peaked earlier, but with a lower overall a mplitude relative 

to those drawn from a uniform distribution , suggesting less evidence was accumulated overall 

for stimuli with a higher prior prob ability. This result is consistent with recent work reported 

by Kelly et al. (Kelly et al., 2021) , who found that validly cued motion directions elicited 

lower peak amplitude CPPs relative to neutral or invalid cues . It also support s the view that 

priors affect the starting point, but not the rate of evidence accumulation . (Interestingly, Kelly 

et al. (Kelly et al., 2021) also report ed increased rates of evidence accumulation under valid 

probability cues, a result not borne out by our data .) 

We next examined how neural representations of the target motion direction evolved 

over the course of a trial . Consistent with previous work from our group (McIntyre et al., 

2022; Rangelov et al., 2021, 2024; Rangelov & Mattingley, 2020) , feature -specific neural 

activity commenced shortly after target -onset and persisted well into the response -period 

after direct visual stimulation ceased . Interestingly, decoding accuracy improved in the 

response period compared with the observation period , suggesting that motion 

representations were strengthened as participants prepared their responses. Since a ligning the 

response device with an internal representation of the target direction require s coordination 

between both sensory and motor processes , it is possible that feature -specific information is 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

broadcast between system s leading to more robust overall representations during response 

production. This interpretation is broadly consistent with the widespread distribution of 

motion information at the beginning of the response period , though further investigation will 

be required to confirm this account .

Motion -decoding accuracy was sensitive to our manipulation of prior and likelihood 

precision; however, the time course of sensitivity was different for each factor . As expected, 

better decoding was achieved on high relative to low coherence trials , indicating that 

population -level stimulus representations encode the precision of the available sensory 

information (Rangelov et al., 2021) . This difference persisted into the response period ,

indicating that information about stimulus reliability was readily available for response 

planning and execution. By contrast, decoding accuracy was only sensitive to the precision of 

the current prior during the response period, once motion information was no longer available 

to the participant. This finding runs counter to recent literature demonstrating early , and even 

pre -stimulus , effects of feature probability on representation s decoded from M /E EG (Aitken 

et al., 2020; Kok et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2018) . It is possible that this discrepancy can be 

traced to the comparatively weaker expectation for specific stimulus directions used in our 

study ; participants here learned continuous ly -distributed prior s over the space of possible 

motion directions, whereas previous work employed cues which probabilistically predict ed 

one of only two (Kok et al., 2017) or five (Aitken et al., 2020) orientation/motion -direction s

with a high degree of certainty. Presenting fewer directions overall might have strengthen ed 

prior expectations for specific directions resulting in previously reported early effects of prior 

expectation . Nonetheless, our findings are in agreement with other studies that have 

challenge d the extent to which recently learned prior probabilit ies can directly modulate early 

sensory processing (Bang & Rahnev, 2017; den Ouden et al., 2025; Feuerriegel, Vogels, et 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

al., 2021; Hu et al., 2025; Rungratsameetaweemana et al., 2018; Rungratsameetaweemana & 

Serences, 2019) .

Decoding accuracy was affected by the precision of prior expectations during the 

response period , with stronger priors driving more accurate decoding independent of the 

effect of stimulus precision (Figure 6B ). This effect suggests that more probable motion 

directions were represented with greater fidelity , but only at later, response preparation 

stages . Since accurate estimation responses , by definition, will correlate strongly with the 

stimulus value, they necessarily elicit feature -selective patterns of neural activity which can 

be decoded the same way as activity patterns driven by the stimulus . One possibility is that 

more probable actions are repr esented with greater fidelity. On the other hand , it is possible 

that more probable sensory features drive heightened decoding accuracy in the response 

period . We tested this hypothesis with an exploratory temporal generalisation analysis in 

which decod ing mo dels trained to identify feature -selective activity patterns during 

obse rvation of coherent motion were used to identify similar activity patterns during the 

response period. Because participants had to maintain fixation and not move the mouse until 

the response dial appeared, these decod ers would not be sensitive to variance in activity 

patterns driven purely by response planning and execution . Instead, t hey should have been 

constrained b y variance in neural signals associated only with accumulating evidence about 

the target motion direction. Intriguingly, the precision of prior expectations continued to 

affect neural representations in the response period : while decoding fell to chance levels in 

the uniform -prior condition, feature -specific information under informative p riors was 

maintained , and numerically graded in its precision . Th is pattern of results suggests that the 

effect of prior s in the main decoding analysis was , at least in part, driven by a pa ttern of 

activity that was already available during motion observation .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

Under a Bayesian inference framework, sensory likelihoods and prior expectations are 

combined to produce a posterior belief whose mean reflects the precision -weighted average 

of each source of information. Given the behavioural results in the current study qualitatively 

followed this kind of inference scheme , with strong response biases toward the mean of the 

current task -prior , we originally expected neural representations of motion direction to be 

similarly biased. There was , however, no evidence of a systematic neural bias at any point 

during the trial , including during the response period , indicating that feature -specific activity 

does not track the Bayesian posterior or the eventual report , but instead faithfully reflects the 

veridical stimulus value . This result raises the important question of how behavioural biases 

arise if not from sensory representations . One possibility is that biases in continuous 

estimation tasks arise only during response preparation. F uture investigations should consider 

using imaging methods with higher spatial resolution (e.g., MEG or fMRI) to specifically 

target response -selective brain areas .

Taken togethe r, our results replicate a well -established finding in sensorimotor 

estimation that the brain learns new priors and uses them to guide decision -making in a 

precision -weighted manner consistent with Bayesian inference (Körding & Wolpert, 2004) .

However, in contrast to popular predictive processing accounts of perceptual decision -

making (de Lange et al., 2018) , we primarily observ ed effects of priors during response 

planning and execution rather than stimulus encoding .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

References 

Aitken, F., Turner, G., & Kok, P. (2020). Prior Expectations of Motion Direction Modulate 

Early Sensory Processing. Journal of Neuroscience , 40 (33), 6389 –6397. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0537 -20.2020 

Bang, J. W., & Rahnev, D. (2017). Stimulus expectation alters decision criterion but not 

sensory signal in perceptual decision making. Scientific Reports , 7(1). Scopus. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -017 -16885 -2

Basso, M. A., & Wurtz, R. H. (1997). Modulation of neuronal activity by target uncertainty. 

Nature , 389 (6646), 66 –69. https://doi.org/10.1038/37975 

Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and 

Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: 

Series B (Methodological) , 57 (1), 289 –300. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517 -

6161.1995.tb02031.x 

Blom, T., Feuerriegel, D., Johnson, P., Bode, S., & Hogendoorn, H. (2020). Predictions drive 

neural representations of visual events ahead of incoming sensory information. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117 (13), 7510 –7515. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1917777117 

Brouwer, G. J., & Heeger, D. J. (2009). Decoding and Reconstructing Color from Responses 

in Human Visual Cortex. Journal of Neuroscience , 29 (44), 13992 –14003. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3577 -09.2009 

Chalk, M., Seitz, A. R., & Seriès, P. (2010). Rapidly learned stimulus expectations alter 

perception of motion. Journal of Vision , 10 (8), 1 –18. https://doi.org/10.1167/10.8.2 

Cousineau, D. (2005). Confidence intervals in within -subject designs: A simpler solution to 

Loftus and Masson’s method. Tutorials in Quantitative Methods for Psychology , 1(1), 

42 –45. https://doi.org/10.20982/tqmp.01.1.p042 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

de Lange, F. P., Heilbron, M., & Kok, P. (2018). How Do Expectations Shape Perception? 

Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 22 (9), 764 –779. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.06.002 

De Lange, F. P., Rahnev, D. A., Donner, T. H., & Lau, H. (2013). Prestimulus Oscillatory 

Activity over Motor Cortex Reflects Perceptual Expectations. The Journal of 

Neuroscience , 33 (4), 1400 –1410. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1094 -12.2013 

den Ouden, C., Kashyap, M., Kikkawa, M., & Feuerriegel, D. (2025). Limited Evidence for 

Probabilistic Cueing Effects on Grating -Evoked Event -Related Potentials and 

Orientation Decoding Performance. Psychophysiology , 62 (5), e70076. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.70076 

Diaz, J. A., Pisauro, M. A., Delis, I., & Philiastides, M. G. (2024). Prior probability biases 

perceptual choices by modulating the accumulation rate, rather than the baseline, of 

decision evidence. Imaging Neuroscience , 2, imag –2–00338. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/imag_a_00338 

Feuerriegel, D., Blom, T., & Hogendoorn, H. (2021). Predictive activation of sensory 

representations as a source of evidence in perceptual decision -making. Cortex , 136 ,

140 –146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2020.12.008 

Feuerriegel, D., Vogels, R., & Kovács, G. (2021). Evaluating the evidence for expectation 

suppression in the visual system. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews , 126 , 368 –

381. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.04.002 

Fiser, J., Berkes, P., Orbán, G., & Lengyel, M. (2010). Statistically optimal perception and 

learning: From behavior to neural representations. Trends in Cognitive Sciences ,

14 (3), 119 –130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2010.01.003 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

Gold, J. I., & Stocker, A. A. (2017). Visual Decision -Making in an Uncertain and Dynamic 

World. Annual Review of Vision Science , 3(Volume 3, 2017), 227 –250. 

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -vision -111815 -114511 

Hu, Z., Tran, D. M. D., & Rideaux, R. (2025). Multimodal evidence challenges the 

effectiveness of probabilistic cueing for establishing sensory expectations. Imaging 

Neuroscience , 3, IMAG.a.152. https://doi.org/10.1162/IMAG.a.152 

Kelly, S. P., Corbett, E. A., & O’Connell, R. G. (2021). Neurocomputational mechanisms of 

prior -informed perceptual decision -making in humans. Nature Human Behaviour ,

5(4), 467 –481. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562 -020 -00967 -9

Kelly, S. P., & O’Connell, R. G. (2013). Internal and External Influences on the Rate of 

Sensory Evidence Accumulation in the Human Brain. Journal of Neuroscience ,

33 (50), 19434 –19441. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3355 -13.2013 

King, J. -R., & Dehaene, S. (2014). Characterizing the dynamics of mental representations: 

The temporal generalization method. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 18 (4), 203 –210. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2014.01.002 

Kok, P., Brouwer, G. J., Gerven, M. A. J. van, & Lange, F. P. de. (2013). Prior Expectations 

Bias Sensory Representations in Visual Cortex. Journal of Neuroscience , 33 (41), 

16275 –16284. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0742 -13.2013 

Kok, P., Failing, M. F., & de Lange, F. P. (2014). Prior Expectations Evoke Stimulus 

Templates in the Primary Visual Cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 26 (7), 

1546 –1554. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00562 

Kok, P., Jehee, J. F. M., & de Lange, F. P. (2012). Less Is More: Expectation Sharpens 

Representations in the Primary Visual Cortex. Neuron , 75 (2), 265 –270. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.04.034 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

Kok, P., Mostert, P., & de Lange, F. P. (2017). Prior expectations induce prestimulus sensory 

templates. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 114 (39), 10473 –10478. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1705652114 

Körding, K. P., & Wolpert, D. M. (2004). Bayesian integration in sensorimotor learning. 

Nature , 427 (6971), 244 –247. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02169 

Larson, E., Gramfort, A., Engemann, D. A., Leppakangas, J., Brodbeck, C., Jas, M., Brooks, 

T. L., Sassenhagen, J., McCloy, D., Luessi, M., King, J. -R., Höchenberger, R., Goj, 

R., Favelier, G., Brunner, C., van Vliet, M., Wronkiewicz, M., Rockhill, A., Hold graf, 

C., … luzpaz. (2024). MNE -Python (Version v1.8.0) [Computer software]. Zenodo. 

https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.13340330 

Ledoit, O., & Wolf, M. (2004). A well -conditioned estimator for large -dimensional 

covariance matrices. Journal of Multivariate Analysis , 88 (2), 365 –411. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0047 -259X(03)00096 -4

Ma, W. J., Kording, K., & Goldreich, D. (2023). Bayesian models of perception and action: 

An introduction . The MIT Press. 

McIntyre, M. E., Rangelov, D., & Mattingley, J. B. (2022). Biased weighting of temporally 

discrete visual stimuli in a continuous report decision -making task: A combined 

behavioral and electrophysiological study. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 

Learning, Memory, and Cognition , 48 (2), 173 –186. 

https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000914 

Mostert, P., Kok, P., & de Lange, F. P. (2015). Dissociating sensory from decision processes 

in human perceptual decision making. Scientific Reports , 5(1), 18253. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/srep18253 

Mulder, M. J., Wagenmakers, E. -J., Ratcliff, R., Boekel, W., & Forstmann, B. U. (2012). 

Bias in the Brain: A Diffusion Model Analysis of Prior Probability and Potential 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

Payoff. Journal of Neuroscience , 32 (7), 2335 –2343. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4156 -11.2012 

Nolan, H., Whelan, R., & Reilly, R. B. (2010). FASTER: Fully Automated Statistical 

Thresholding for EEG artifact Rejection. Journal of Neuroscience Methods , 192 (1), 

152 –162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2010.07.015 

O’Connell, R. G., Dockree, P. M., & Kelly, S. P. (2012). A supramodal accumulation -to -

bound signal that determines perceptual decisions in humans. Nature Neuroscience ,

15 (12), 1729 –1735. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3248 

Park, J., Kim, S., Kim, H. R., & Lee, J. (2023). Prior expectation enhances sensorimotor 

behavior by modulating population tuning and subspace activity in sensory cortex. 

Science Advances , 9(27), eadg4156. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adg4156 

Peirce, J., Gray, J. R., Simpson, S., MacAskill, M., Höchenberger, R., Sogo, H., Kastman, E., 

& Lindeløv, J. K. (2019). PsychoPy2: Experiments in behavior made easy. Behavior 

Research Methods , 51 (1), 195 –203. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428 -018 -01193 -y

Press, C., Kok, P., & Yon, D. (2020). The Perceptual Prediction Paradox. Trends in Cognitive 

Sciences , 24 (1), 13 –24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.11.003 

Rangelov, D., Fellrath, J., & Mattingley, J. B. (2024). Integrated perceptual decisions rely on 

parallel evidence accumulation. The Journal of Neuroscience , e2368232024. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2368 -23.2024 

Rangelov, D., & Mattingley, J. B. (2020). Evidence accumulation during perceptual decision -

making is sensitive to the dynamics of attentional selection. NeuroImage , 220 ,

117093. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117093 

Rangelov, D., West, R., & Mattingley, J. B. (2021). Stimulus Reliability Automatically 

Biases Temporal Integration of Discrete Perceptual Targets in the Human Brain. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

Journal of Neuroscience , 41 (36), 7662 –7674. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2459 -20.2021 

Rao, V., DeAngelis, G. C., & Snyder, L. H. (2012). Neural Correlates of Prior Expectations 

of Motion in the Lateral Intraparietal and Middle Temporal Areas. Journal of 

Neuroscience , 32 (29), 10063 –10074. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5948 -

11.2012 

Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (2008). The Diffusion Decision Model: Theory and Data for 

Two -Choice Decision Tasks. Neural Computation , 20 (4), 873 –922. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.2008.12 -06 -420 

Rideaux, R., West, R. K., Rangelov, D., & Mattingley, J. B. (2023). Distinct early and late 

neural mechanisms regulate feature -specific sensory adaptation in the human visual 

system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 

America , 120 (6). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2216192120 

Rungratsameetaweemana, N., Itthipuripat, S., Salazar, A., & Serences, J. T. (2018). 

Expectations Do Not Alter Early Sensory Processing during Perceptual Decision -

Making. Journal of Neuroscience , 38 (24), 5632 –5648. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3638 -17.2018 

Rungratsameetaweemana, N., & Serences, J. T. (2019). Dissociating the impact of attention 

and expectation on early sensory processing. Current Opinion in Psychology, 

Attention & Perception , 29 , 181 –186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2019.03.014 

Seabold, S., & Perktold, J. (2010). statsmodels: Econometric and statistical modeling with 

python. In 9th Python in Science Conference .

Stone, C., Mattingley, J. B., Bode, S., & Rangelov, D. (2024). Distinct neural markers of 

evidence accumulation index metacognitive processing before and after simple visual 

decisions. Cerebral Cortex , 34 (5), bhae179. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhae179 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.13.718329 doi: bioRxiv preprint

38 

Summerfield, C., & de Lange, F. P. (2014). Expectation in perceptual decision making: 

Neural and computational mechanisms. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 15 (11), 745 –

756. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3838 

Tang, M. F., Smout, C. A., Arabzadeh, E., & Mattingley, J. B. (2018). Prediction error and 

repetition suppression have distinct effects on neural representations of visual 

information. eLife , 7, e33123. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.33123 

Todorovic, A., & de Lange, F. P. (2012). Repetition Suppression and Expectation 

Suppression Are Dissociable in Time in Early Auditory Evoked Fields. Journal of 

Neuroscience , 32 (39), 13389 –13395. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2227 -

12.2012 

Walsh, K., McGovern, D. P., Clark, A., & O’Connell, R. G. (2020). Evaluating the 

neurophysiological evidence for predictive processing as a model of perception. 

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 1464 (1), 242 –268. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.14321 

Walsh, K., McGovern, D. P., Dully, J., Kelly, S. P., & O’Connell, R. G. (2024). Prior 

probability cues bias sensory encoding with increasing task exposure. eLife , 12 ,

RP91135. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91135 

Weiss, Y., Simoncelli, E. P., & Adelson, E. H. (2002). Motion illusions as optimal percepts. 

Nature Neuroscience , 5(6), 598 –604. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn858 

Yon, D., Gilbert, S. J., de Lange, F. P., & Press, C. (2018). Action sharpens sensory 

representations of expected outcomes. Nature Communications , 9(1). Scopus. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -018 -06752 -7