Title: From Gaze to Guidance: Interpreting and Adapting to Users' Cognitive Needs with Multimodal Gaze-Aware AI Assistants

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.08062v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Apr 2026 00:54:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# From Gaze to Guidance: Interpreting and Adapting to Users’ Cognitive Needs with Multimodal Gaze-Aware AI Assistants 

# Valdemar Danry 

Microsoft Research MIT Media Lab Cambridge, MA, USA 

# Javier Hernandez 

Microsoft Research Cambridge, MA, USA 

# Andrew Wilson 

Microsoft Research Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 

# Pattie Maes 

MIT Media Lab Cambridge, MA, USA 

# Judith Amores 

Microsoft Research Cambridge, MA, USA 

Figure 1: Overview of the gaze-aware cognitive AI assistant. (a) A user wearing wearable AI glasses which streams eye gaze data in to a gaze-aware cognitive LLM assistant. (b-c) An example of the AI providing assistance after reading a difficult book, (d) User study evaluating AI interaction and accuracy. 

## Abstract 

Current LLM assistants are powerful at answering questions, but they have limited access to the behavioral context that reveals when and where a user is struggling. We present a gaze-grounded multi-modal LLM assistant that uses egocentric video with gaze overlays to identify likely points of difficulty and target follow-up retro-spective assistance. We instantiate this vision in a controlled study (n=36) comparing the gaze-aware AI assistant to a text-only LLM as-sistant. Compared to a conventional LLM assistant, the gaze-aware assistant was rated as significantly more accurate and personal-ized in its assessments of users’ reading behavior and significantly improved people’s ability to recall information. Users spoke sig-nificantly fewer words with the gaze-aware assistant, indicating more efficient interactions. Qualitative results underscored both perceived benefits in comprehension and challenges when inter-pretations of gaze behaviors were inaccurate. Our findings suggest that gaze-aware LLM assistants can reason about cognitive needs to improve cognitive outcomes of users. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → Interactive systems and tools .

## Keywords 

AI agents, eye-gaze, reasoning 

## 1 Introduction 

In everyday life, humans routinely rely on other people’s gaze to infer what they are focusing on, interested in, thinking about or struggling with. We follow others’ eyes to establish joint focus, infer the object of a referential expression, anticipate upcoming actions, assess if someone is actively thinking, and interpret social intentions such as interest, avoidance, confidence, or a desire to engage [ 8, 18 ,24 ]. A student who repeatedly looks back and forth between the same lines of text may seem stuck; someone who looks at an object and then gazes upwards may be actively thinking about it; a person who averts their gaze or looks downward in conversation may appear hesitant or uncomfortable; a person staring dead into space 

> arXiv:2604.08062v1 [cs.HC] 9 Apr 2026 Danry et al.

may be tired or disinterested; and someone who lingers visually on an object or place may signal curiosity or interest [4, 8, 24]. Being able to notice such moments matters because it changes how help can be given. Detecting when someone is confused, hes-itant, disengaged, or curious allows others to respond with clar-ification, encouragement, reframing, or additional context at the moment it is most useful. In this sense, gaze is not only a cue to attention, but also a cue to possible cognitive need. When these moments are recognized and supported well, they can become op-portunities for comprehension, persistence, and cognitive growth rather than silent failure or disengagement [ 16 , 34 , 46 ]. This is es-pecially important because people do not always reliably notice when their own understanding is breaking down, nor can they always articulate why they are stuck or what kind of help they need [32, 34, 46]. At the same time, today’s AI assistants and multimodal large language model (LLM) interfaces remain largely blind to this kind of behavioral context. Although modern assistants can understand text, images, audio, video, and support tasks such as question an-swering, summarization, and extended dialogue, they still rely pri-marily on explicit user input: what the user says, types, uploads, or asks. As a result, they are often unable to perceive the subtle behavioral signals that humans use to infer when help may be needed, what the user may be struggling with, or whether the user is confused, frustrated, disengaged, or curious before that state is explicitly verbalized. In this paper, we explore this gap through the design and evalu-ation of a gaze-aware cognitive assistant that integrates egocentric sensing with multimodal LLM reasoning. Unlike prior efforts that use gaze metrics (such as fixation and regression analysis) to help the system know what the user is looking at or what the user is referring to, our system uses first-person video and projected gaze as direct multimodal context for an AI assistant, enabling the model itself to interpret behavior patterns to infer candidate indicators of cognitive need. We investigate whether grounding assistance in this behavioral context allows AI systems to offer more rele-vant, personalized, and cognitive-oriented support by shifting the interpretation of moments of difficulty from the user to the model, reducing the burden on users to explicitly recognize and articulate when and where they need help. This paper makes the following contributions: (1) A Gaze-Aware LLM assistant with a gaze-grounded prompt-ing architecture that converts gaze-projected egocentric video into temporally structured observations for multi-modal LLM assistance. (2) A controlled study in a reading context showing improved recall and stronger perceived accuracy and targeting than a text-only baseline, alongside a characterization of failure modes. (3) An approach and design implications for gaze-aware AI assistants that shifts gaze from a signal used primarily for attention tracking, reference grounding, or explicit control to gaze as a contextual behavioral input for multimodal LLM reasoning about user candidate moments of difficulty. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 Gaze as a signal for adaptive assistance 

Eye tracking provides a rich but indirect signal about human cog-nition. Prior work has linked gaze behavior—including fixation duration, regressions, pupil dilation, and blink dynamics—to con-structs such as effortful processing, cognitive load, mind wandering, and confusion, while social-gaze research has shown that gaze and gaze aversion can also reflect interactional states such as turn man-agement, monitoring, and effort regulation [ 2, 15 , 19 , 22 , 27 , 33 ]. Dynamic gaze visualizations have likewise been shown to sup-port above-chance judgments of task, preference, answer choice, task performance, and confidence, especially when the gaze trace is shown in scene context [ 7 , 17 , 48 ]. At the same time, gaze is fundamentally ambiguous: the same visual behavior may reflect confusion, verification, curiosity, familiarity, or planning, and is therefore best treated as probabilistic evidence rather than direct access to internal state [22, 31, 48]. Building on this, prior systems have used gaze to detect pos-sible cognitive needs and adapt support. GazeTutor detected dis-engagement and triggered gaze-sensitive tutoring dialogue [ 14 ]. Other work has used gaze together with behavioral features and supervised models to predict confusion in learning environments and interactive visualizations [28, 37]. Related gaze-contingent in-structional systems adapt explanations or learning materials based on visual behavior, for example by providing personalized pro-cessing support in multimedia learning tasks [ 43 ]. More recent systems move from detection to assistance: The Reading Assistant 

used gaze-triggered auditory prompting for reading support, while later work explored adaptive reading and writing assistance, includ-ing gaze-based augmentations for low-vision reading, situation-aware writing support, and mixed-reality reading help with LLMs [ 29 , 45 , 47 , 50 ]. Other recent systems combine gaze with LLM-generated feedback or GenAI adaptation in domains such as read-ing and programming [ 41 , 44 ]. However, these systems generally operate in text- or screen-centric settings and typically pass OCR text, detected text spans, or derived gaze metrics to the language model rather than using raw egocentric visual context as input. 

## 2.2 Gaze-grounded multimodal assistants 

A parallel line of work has explored gaze as an implicit multimodal cue for grounding interaction. In XR and embodied assistant set-tings, gaze has been used together with speech, pointing, actions, and dialogue history to disambiguate references, recover user in-tent, and localize relevant scene elements [ 5, 30 , 39 , 42 ]. In these systems, gaze primarily helps determine what the user refers to or 

which object or subtask is relevant, rather than whether the user may be cognitively stuck on specific content. Related work in egocentric assistance has studied proactive sup-port from first-person video. HoloAssist introduced a large-scale egocentric benchmark for real-world assistance, and later work synthesized dialogue and modeled proactive help from streaming egocentric video [ 51 , 54 ]. Recent model-centric work has also begun incorporating gaze into first-person multimodal language model pipelines. For example, GazeLLM uses gaze to guide efficient pro-cessing of first-person video, and EgoGazeVQA studies whether gaze-guided prompting improves intent inference from egocentric From Gaze to Guidance: Interpreting and Adapting to Users’ Cognitive Needs with Multimodal Gaze-Aware AI Assistants 

daily-life video [ 38 , 40 ]. These systems demonstrate the feasibility of gaze-guided egocentric multimodal reasoning, but their emphasis is on referential grounding, efficiency, or task understanding rather than on targeting conversational support around likely moments of difficulty. Taken together, prior work has used gaze mainly in three ways: for reference grounding in multimodal interaction, for OCR- or text-centric reading and writing support, or as a source of downstream metrics such as dwell time, regressions, or estimated cognitive load [5 , 29 , 41 , 44 , 47 ]. Our work differs in treating gaze-projected ego-centric video as direct multimodal input to the assistant and using temporal interpretation of gaze behavior over multiple timestamped images in scene context to surface candidate cognitive needs for support. Rather than using gaze only to resolve reference or only passing reduced gaze-derived features to the model, we explore gaze as behavioral context for targeting assistance. 

## 2.3 Positioning our work 

Our work sits at the intersection of these threads but addresses a dif-ferent gap. Compared with prior gaze-aware tutoring and reading systems, we do not limit assistance to text regions, OCR output, or predefined gaze metrics alone. Compared with gaze-grounded XR assistants, our goal is not only referential grounding but interpreta-tion of gaze as a probabilistic cue to possible cognitive need. And compared with recent egocentric MLLM work, we are not primarily concerned with video understanding benchmarks, task replication, or compute-efficient cropping. Instead, we explore whether egocen-tric video with projected gaze overlays can serve as direct multimodal input to an interactive assistant that infers candidate moments of cognitive struggle and supports the user conversationally . This shifts gaze from a narrow deictic or analytic feature into behavioral con-text for assistance, while also moving beyond stationary text-only settings toward more open-ended first-person interaction. 

## 3 System Description 

We designed a gaze-aware AI assistant that streams egocentric video and eye-tracking data from head-worn smart glasses to multimodal LLMs, which interpret the user’s gaze behavior in context and provides after-the-fact conversational support (shown in Figure 2). 

## 3.1 Multimodal Scene Grounding 

The sensing setup consisted of the Meta Aria glasses streaming a forward-facing RGB point-of-view camera ( 2880 × 2880 ) together with two inward-facing eye-tracking cameras. Gaze projection was computed locally using the open-source Aria gaze inference model 1.The resulting gaze vector was projected on to the egocentric image as a red semi-transparent dot. A 200 × 200 pixel crop centered on the gaze point was generated in parallel, since previous work has shown that giving a multimodal language model a regular and zoomed frame increases accuracy [ 53 ]. The gaze-projected images were given as direct input to the LLM. We chose this design instead of a conventional OCR-first (which is commonly used other approaches[ 5 , 41 ]) to enable applications be-yond reading; direct multimodal grounding preserves visual scene context around the attended region and makes the architecture 

> 1https://github.com/facebookresearch/projectaria_eyetracking

more extensible beyond text-only settings, allowing the language model to make more contextually expansive interpretations of gaze behavior. 

## 3.2 Inference of Candidate Moments of Difficulty 

To avoid overwhelming the model [ 26 , 52 ], the inference of can-didate moments of difficulty was decomposed into two tasks: (1) creating a text-based list of gaze behavior over time, and (2) inter-preting the list of behavior to infer candidate need states. For the first component, full egocentric frames with gaze overlay together with the local crop were sent to GPT-4.1 every 0.5 seconds. The model was then prompted to return a structured description of the attended item which was then timestamped and added to the action list: 

class GazeAnalysis(BaseModel): type: Literal["word","object","none"] content: str # e.g., "Quantum" context: str # e.g., "In the sentence: 'Quantum is... '"

For example, the model might return a word (e.g. ’Quantum’) to-gether with the sentence or phrase in which it appeared, or identify a non-text object (e.g. a lamp) and its context (e.g. standing on a desk). This structured representation gave us a simple intermediate output and helped to not overwhelm the model, which especially for multimodal inputs may struggle without task decomposition [26, 52]. See an example of an action list in Fig. 3. Next, the second component infers candidate need states from the gaze behavior action list. For this, the sequence of GazeAnalysis 

objects produced by the grounding stage was passed to GPT-4.1 prompted to identify gaze-linked behaviors and needs, and align them with specific words, phrases, or sentence regions (For the full prompt see Appendix A). The analyses results are then used to trigger or give context to the conversational assistant. For the present study, this temporal analysis was performed ret-rospectively after the participant completed reading the paragraph. The grounding stage produced one timestamped observation ev-ery 0.5 seconds, and the full grounded gaze sequence for that trial was accumulated and processed only after reading ended. In other words, the analysis window in this evaluation was the complete reading episode for that passage, rather than a rolling online buffer. We adopted this boundary-aligned design after pilot testing because it avoided interrupting readers in the middle of a difficult passage, though it necessarily sacrificed immediacy of support. More gener-ally, the same architecture could support alternative trigger policies in future work, including fixed-interval analysis, on-demand analy-sis when the user explicitly queries the assistant, or event-triggered just-in-time assistance. 

## 3.3 Conversational Assistance 

The third component of the system turns inferred candidate need states into assistance. The conversational layer was implemented using the OpenAI Realtime API ( gpt-4o-realtime-preview ) via Azure or OpenAI for low latency. The assistant received the text together with the gaze-based analysis produced by the previous stage (or, in the control condition, a text-only analysis without gaze). Audio was streamed as 24 kHz PCM16 mono chunks, with speech Danry et al. 

Figure 2: System overview of the gaze-aware AI assistant. 

recognition and synthesis handled by the same API. In typical use, round-trip speech latency remained below 2 s, while the full pipeline from gaze-linked observation to available assistant output averaged 4.1 s end-to-end. For the purpose of this study, the assistant was prompted to assist the user based on their cognitive needs and use both explanations and Socratic interactions [ 12 ]. Moreover, given the uncertainty around interpreting cognitive needs from gaze alone, we prompted the assistant to use hedging and confirm with users before explaining as recommended in prior work [21]. 

## 3.4 Design Rationale 

Taken together, the architecture prioritizes (1) direct multimodal grounding over OCR-only reduction in order to preserve scene context and generalize beyond text-only interfaces; (2) temporal reasoning problem over frame-wise classification, since moments of need emerge from gaze patterns over time rather than isolated fixations; (3) selective interpretation of gaze-linked events rather than indiscriminate ingestion of all available context, since more context is not always more useful for assistance; and (4) uncertainty-aware and low-friction , using hedged language and conservative timing to reduce the risk of overclaiming and interruption. We evaluate this architecture in reading comprehension because it offers a tractable first testbed: gaze can often be related to specific words, phrases, and passages, and the effects of support can be assessed in a more controlled way, using established comprehension measures. However, the system architecture itself is not inherently tied to reading. More broadly, it is intended as a prototype of how multimodal LLM assistants might use gaze-projected egocentric video to infer candidate cognitive need states and provide targeted support. 

## 4 Study Design 

To evaluate the impact of the AI assistant on user comprehension and experience, we conducted a controlled user study on a reading task. Our primary aim was to understand not only how gaze-aware cognitive assistants is able to accurately capture cognitive needs but also how it affects cognitive outcomes such as learning and how users interact with the assistant itself, compared to an assistant without access to egocentric gaze video. 

## 4.1 Participants and Data Collection 

We recruited 41 healthy adults (age 18-44, largest group 25-34 years; gender 57% male, 43% female) across two independent study sites through various mailing lists. We excluded participants who did not speak English, had conditions preventing reading, or could not wear contact lenses in place of their own glasses. Five participants were excluded from analysis: three due to inadvertent device dis-connection that caused data loss, and two for completing the study in under 10 minutes (average completion time was 51 minutes). All subjects gave written informed consent prior to participating (reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Boards, and were given a $50 AMEX gift card. All data was stored locally on a password-protected machine in accordance with the IRB in a de-identified manner. LLMs were accessed through the Azure AI Foundry via API endpoints and OpenAI’s API. The study was partly completed at [REDACTED] location and completed at [REDACTED LOCATION]. 

## 4.2 Experimental Conditions 

We conducted a within-subjects experimental design with two con-ditions: (1) an interactive assistant interpreting their cognitive needs from egocentric gaze video (gaze-aware cognitive assistant), and (2) an interactive assistant interpreting cognitive needs only from From Gaze to Guidance: Interpreting and Adapting to Users’ Cognitive Needs with Multimodal Gaze-Aware AI Assistants 

Figure 3: Real examples of gaze-reading behavior, the object list generated from LLM object recognition, the LLM eye tracking analysis with the object list as input, and a log of the resulting AI interaction. 

the text they read. In both conditions, users read one text while wearing the prototype headset with egocentric gaze streaming on or off. When the gaze streaming was on, the system compiled a gaze actions throughout the reading. After reading the text, users interacted with an assistant that either (1) had access to both the text they read and the LLM-generated analysis of cognitive needs from their gaze data (see Section 3), or (2) had access to the text they read and text-based analysis with the exact prompting as the LLM-generated analysis of cognitive needs from their gaze data but without gaze data. For the prompts used in both conditions and examples of analyses see Appendix A. Participants communicated with the assistant through speech. 

## 4.3 Materials 

Six readings with topics of varying difficulty were selected from Wikipedia. For each topic, Flesch-Kincaid Grade (FKG) level was cal-culated to ensure variance in difficulty across selected texts. Word count (WC) was kept consistent to allow for comparison. Topics include (1) "Water Cycle", (2) "Plate tectonics", (3) "Inflation", (4) "Cli-mate Change", (5) "Superdeterminism", (6) "Topological Quantum Computing". To assess recall, transfer learning, and definitional learning, re-call, concept-inventories and definition probes were constructed, following previous literature. Recall questions were constructed following Roediger & Karpicke’s retrieval-practice questions [ 25 ]. Each recall question consisted of three literal facts per passage. Definition probe questions were constructed to test the assistant’s ability to notice terms undefined in the text that the user didn’t understand. Lastly, to measure deeper understanding and transfer learning to new contexts by generalization, we constructed concept-inventory items, which in literature are used to evaluate transfer learning. Outcome metrics followed best practice from retrieval-practice research [ 25 ], incidental vocabulary assessment [ 35 , 36 ]and the concept-inventory methods originating with the Force Con-cept Inventory [ 23 ]. See examples of recall, definition probe and concept-inventory items in Appendix C. To facilitate future repli-cation, surveys and other materials are provided in our GitHub repository [link to be added after publication]. 

## 4.4 Procedure 

The study followed a within-subjects design with counterbalanced condition order. Each participant completed two main study blocks: one with the gaze-aware assistant and one with the text-only as-sistant, using a different reading passage in each block. A third comparison block was then used to directly compare the two anal-ysis types side by side. To maximize comparability across the two main phases, passage order was fixed: participants read the Inflation passage in the first block and the Plate Tectonics passage in the second block, both selected as medium-difficulty texts. For phase 3 passages were randomly sampled across difficulty. See an overview of the procedure in Appendix E. At the start of the session, participants provided informed con-sent, completed a demographics questionnaire, and were fitted with the Aria glasses, followed by eye-tracking calibration. In each of the two main blocks, participants first read a passage and rated their perceived understanding. They then interacted by speech with the assigned assistant. After the interaction, they again rated their understanding and completed the post-task measures, including recall, definition probe, concept-inventory, and exploratory ques-tionnaires. Finally, they were shown the analysis that had informed the assistant in that block and rated its perceived accuracy, confi-dence in that rating, and personalization. After completing both main blocks, participants completed a third block designed to compare the analyses more directly. They read an additional passage and were then shown a gaze-based anal-ysis and a text-only analysis side by side in randomized order. For each, they rated perceived accuracy, confidence, and personaliza-tion, and indicated which analysis better matched their reading experience. After this, the participants engaged in a 5-minute in-terview using the explicitation interview technique [ 49 ], where Danry et al. 

participants were asked open-ended questions such as "Describe your experience", with follow-up questions probing the users to add further details to their descriptions if details were missing or unclear, for instance, "How did the assistant do X?", "What do you mean when you say Y?". 

## 5 Analysis 

Our main dependent variables were recall, definition probe, and concept-inventory scores of texts across conditions. To assess the LLM’s ability to interpret gaze data, our main variables also included participant accuracy ratings of the LLM analysis, their confidence in their rating, and how personalized they found the analysis (Likert, 1-7). Lastly, in the phase 3 side-by-side comparison, we asked the participants to choose the analysis that they preferred between the eye tracking and text-only based analyses. For each dependent variable, we performed within-subject (paired) statistical tests comparing the experimental and control conditions. Specifically, we used paired-sample t-tests to assess mean differ-ences, and Wilcoxon signed-rank tests as a non-parametric alter-native when normality was not met. Effect sizes were reported as Cohen’s 𝑑 𝑧 for paired designs. For binary or ordinal outcomes, we used McNemar’s test or Wilcoxon signed-rank as appropriate. Exploratory variables included the change in cognitive load (us-ing NASA-TLX scores) and Likert scales (1-7) for perceived under-standing of the text before and after interaction with the assistant, usefulness, AI’s ability to understand their cognitive reactions to the content and how engaging they found the AI interaction (using the Human Language Model Interaction Questionnaire (HLMIQ)). Behavioral metrics included the number of conversational turns and total user words. We conducted an apriori power analysis using a paired-sample t-test (two-tailed) in G*Power ( 𝛼 = .05 , 𝑝𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 = .80 ). Assuming a medium effect size ( 𝑑 = 0.5, Cohen), the required sample size was estimated at N = 34 participants. Thus, we report results for 36 participants. In addition to our main variables, we also conducted an ex-ploratory LLM-as-a-judge analysis of the human-AI conversations in either condition [ 55 ]. This allowed us to investigate how well the model followed instructions as well as which interaction strategies the model used. For the LLM judge, a series of classifier descriptions were put together. The prompts for each classifier can be found in Appendix D. The prompts for the classifiers ranged from sanity checks that the model followed its prompt (e.g., ’aligned with anal-ysis’, ’checked user needs’ and ’monitored comprehension’), while others were about the chatbot’s ability to use the LLM eye tracking analysis in conversation. We used GPT-5.4 for classification with reasoning effort set to “None”. For the qualitative analysis, interviews were transcribed using Microsoft Word’s transcription feature, and a thematic analysis of the transcripts was conducted to find overlapping themes among participants. Inductive coding [ 6] was conducted to discover salient themes. Two coders iteratively coded the narratives with themes, discussed and aligned any disagreements, and added emerging themes until reaching theoretical saturation [11]. 

## 6 Quantitative Results 6.1 The Gaze-aware Cognitive Assistant Increased Recall 

Recall performance was higher in the gaze-aware AI condition than in control (control: 88 .9% ±15 .9% , experimental: 96 .3% ±10 .6% ; mean paired difference +7.4 percentage points, 95% CI [1.3, 13 .5]). This effect was significant in both tests ( 𝑡 -test: 𝑝 = 0.0187 ; Wilcoxon: 

𝑝 = 0.0209 ; Cohen’s 𝑑 𝑧 = 0.41 ). Definition-probe accuracy showed a smaller, non-significant in-crease (control: 77 .8% ± 42 .2% , experimental: 83 .3% ± 37 .8% ; mean paired difference +5.6 percentage points, 95% CI [− 10 .5, 21 .6];

𝑡 -test 𝑝 = 0.4873 , Wilcoxon 𝑝 = 0.4795 , Cohen’s 𝑑 𝑧 = 0.12 ). Concept-inventory scores were also not significantly different (con-trol: 49 .1% ± 30 .3% , experimental: 51 .9% ± 27 .0% ; mean paired differ-ence +2.8 percentage points, 95% CI [− 10 .3, 15 .8]; 𝑡 -test 𝑝 = 0.6679 ,Wilcoxon 𝑝 = 0.7552 , Cohen’s 𝑑 𝑧 = 0.07 ). Taken together, these results indicate a selective learning benefit of gaze-informed support: participants showed a reliable improve-ment in recall, whereas gains on definition-probe and concept-inventory measures were positive in direction but not statistically conclusive. In contrast, self-reported change in understanding re-mained similar across conditions (see Fig. 4, B “Understanding"), suggesting that objective performance gains were not always mir-rored by subjective learning judgments. 

## 6.2 Eye Tracking Analyses Were Perceived as More Accurate and Personalized 

The gaze-aware analysis used by the assistant was rated as more accurate and more personalized than analysis for the control con-dition (see Fig. 4, C). Accuracy ratings increased from 4.31 ± 1.58 

in control to 5.50 ± 1.06 in the gaze-aware condition (mean differ-ence = 1.19 , 95% CI [0.60 , 1.79 ]; paired 𝑡 -test 𝑝 = 0.00027 , Wilcoxon 

𝑝 = 0.00044 , phase 1 and 2 ratings). Personalization ratings likewise increased from 3.94 ± 1.62 to 5.50 ± 1.18 (mean difference = 1.56 ,

95% CI [0.99 , 2.12 ]; paired 𝑡 -test 𝑝 < 0.00001 , Wilcoxon 𝑝 = 0.00005 ,phase 1 and 2 ratings). In the phase-3 comparison, 63 .9% of partic-ipants preferred the eye-tracking summary (23/36), versus 36 .1% 

preferring the text-only summary (13/36). A secondary analysis of accuracy ratings in phase 3 revealed differences between control and gaze-based analyses to disappear in the more difficult para-graphs (See Appendix E. This suggests that difficult paragraphs may benefit little from targeted assistance since both control and ex-perimental analyses will likely flag the same things. Overall, these results indicate that grounding feedback in gaze-derived signals substantially improved perceived accuracy and personalization, with a moderate preference advantage in direct side-by-side choice. 

## 6.3 Perceived Effort and Frustration 

Exploratory measures of workload (NASA-TLX) and engagement also trended in favor of the gaze-aware AI assistant (see figure in Appendix E). Total user words were significantly lower in experi-mental compared to control ( 83 .25 ± 91 .62 in control to 57 .28 ± 66 .57 

in experimental, mean paired difference = −25 .97 words; Wilcoxon 

𝑝 = 0.0469 ; 𝑑 𝑧 = −0.29 ). Conversation turns showed a similar directional reduction 𝑓 𝑟𝑜𝑚 (8.39 ± 3.59 )𝑡𝑜 7.22 ± 3.84 ; Wilcoxon From Gaze to Guidance: Interpreting and Adapting to Users’ Cognitive Needs with Multimodal Gaze-Aware AI Assistants 

Figure 4: Bar plots of results for main variables across conditions for (a) learning performance, (b) LLM analysis ratings, and (c) the number of words uttered per interactions by each user, with standard errors. * 𝑝 < .05 , ** 𝑝 < .01 , *** 𝑝 < .001 .

𝑝 = 0.1067 . NASA-TLX outcomes were also directionally lower with the gaze-aware AI assistant, including mental demand ( 10 .00 ± 4.81 

vs. 8.89 ± 3.72 ), effort ( 11 .00 ± 4.58 vs. 10 .06 ± 3.67 ), and frustration (5.17 ± 4.25 vs. 4.78 ± 3.96 ), but these workload differences were not statistically significant. 

## 7 Exploratory Interaction Analysis 

To explore assistant behaviors during interactions, we applied an independent LLM-as-judge analysis of the recorded conversations. 

## 7.1 Both assistants were highly aligned and consistently checked user needs 

One important question is whether the assistant used for inter-action in both conditions could accurately ground its interaction in the analyses. Across conditions, both assistants responses were generally rated as highly aligned with the user-needs identified in each analysis ( 1.00 ± 0.00 experimental vs. 0.94 ± 0.23 control), and explicit confirmed the users needs with them before giving them explanations ( 0.97 ± 0.17 experimental vs. 1.00 ± 0.00 control). The assistant’s monitoring of the user’s comprehension during the interaction was also scored highly in both conditions ( 0.94 ± 0.23 

experimental vs. 0.97 ± 0.17 control). These patterns suggest the assistant was able to scaffold assistance when interacting using both control and experimental analyses. 

## 7.2 Users appeared to steer less, and showed less confusion, with the gaze-aware AI assistant 

The LLM-as-judge analysis also suggested meaningful user-side differences between conditions. Participants in the gaze-aware con-dition were less likely to take the lead in steering the conversation (0.44 ±0.50 ) than in control ( 0.67 ±0.48 ; exploratory paired 𝑡 = −2.26 ,

𝑝 = 0.030 , 𝑑 𝑧 = −0.38 ). They also showed a lower rate of changing focus ( 0.22 ± 0.42 vs. 0.25 ± 0.44 ) and a lower rate of losing interest (0.17 ± 0.38 vs. 0.22 ± 0.42 ), although these differences were small. Importantly, users were also judged to express confusion less often in the gaze-aware condition ( 0.39 ± 0.49 ) than in control (0.61 ± 0.49 ), with a moderate directional effect (exploratory paired 

𝑡 = −1.67 , 𝑝 = 0.103 , 𝑑 𝑧 = −0.28 ). Taken together, these exploratory patterns are consistent with conversations that required less user-side repair and steering in the gaze-aware AI assistant condition and suggest that participants interacting with the gaze-aware AI assis-tant might have experienced more immediately relevant and helpful content without them needing to steer the dialogue to get the infor-mation that they needed. Because these are multiple exploratory comparisons, they should be interpreted as hypothesis-generating rather than confirmatory. 

## 8 Qualitative Results 

Following the thematic coding method outlined in Section 5, inter-view transcripts from participants about their experience with the control and cognitive assistant were analyzed with the following themes emerging. 

8.0.1 Eye-Tracking Assistance Was Experienced as More Tar-geted, Adaptive, and Less Repetitive . Participants consistently described the gaze-aware cognitive assistant as offering more tar-geted and less repetitive support than the text-only baseline. Many emphasized that it picked up on the exact concepts they struggled with, which made the interaction feel adaptive and engaging. P10 explained: “it actually got some of the things that I was strug-gling with. That’s what prompted me to actually engage with it and ask more questions versus when it was completely wrong.” Simi-larly, P12 noted how the assistant highlighted their difficulties with domain-specific terms: “it did do a better job of recognizing what I was confused about... it actually got the technical terms I didn’t get right away.” Danry et al. 

P17 described the benefit of targeted support for difficult vo-cabulary: “it was able to kind of walk me through the higher level overview... but I struggled with some of the technical terms and like which one’s solid, which one’s liquid. It was good at picking out those details and telling them to me in an easier way.” P8 also remarked on this alignment: “it actually got some of the things I was like struggling with... that’s what made me want to keep going and ask more.” 

Other participants echoed that the assistant seemed to “read their mind” by flagging the concepts they had paused on. P3 recalled: 

“the second one was like, oh, you might have problems with this as well and that’s exactly what I had just been stuck on.” P23 similarly highlighted precision: “the second one was a lot more precise... the first one just assumed I didn’t understand complex words, but the second one actually pointed to where I had reread and lingered. That felt accurate.” 

Even subtle struggles were picked up. P1 observed: “the second one actually simplified the parts I was hesitating on, not just repeating the whole passage.” And P22 noted: “the second one seemed to propose better ideas and how to better understand the text, almost like it noticed exactly where I had been stuck.” 

8.0.2 Eye-Tracking Analyses Felt Granular and Personally Relevant While Text-Only Analyses Felt Generic . Participants overwhelmingly reported that the gaze-informed analyses felt more precise, individualized, and aligned with their actual reading expe-rience, while the text-only analyses were described as generic or templated. This distinction was reported by many (P1, P3, P4, P6, P8, P9, P11, P20, P23). The difference was not subtle: participants often remarked that they could “see themselves” in the eye-tracking summaries, whereas the text-only ones felt disconnected from their own struggles. For example, P4 shared: “after reading what it had said, I was like, oh, I’m pretty sure that felt exactly like my reading experience.” 

Similarly, P23 reflected: “the second one was a lot more precise... the first one just assumed I didn’t understand complex words, but the second one actually pointed to where I had reread and lingered. That felt accurate.” P11 highlighted the striking recognition he felt: “with the quantum computing passage, it picked up on the exact sentence where I was hesitating. I was like, my God, it actually noticed.” 

Some participants emphasized how this specificity fostered trust. P4 admitted: “At one point I wondered if it was just listing random things, but because it was more specific than the last one, I trusted it.” 

Others pointed to the difference in personalization: P8 remarked: 

“summary B was more generic, but summary A was aligned with my intentions, it noticed what I was really pausing on.” P20 simi-larly explained: “the second one would just be like what any typical reader might struggle with, but the eye-tracking one was about me specifically.” 

8.0.3 The System Reduced Cognitive Friction and Barriers to Seeking Help . Several participants emphasized that the gaze-aware AI assistant lowered friction to asking for help and made clarifications more seamless within the flow of reading. Instead of breaking immersion to look up terms or search on their phone, the assistant provided timely reinforcement that made learning feel more effortless. This was reported by P22, P23, among others. P23 described this directly: “so many times I don’t understand something but don’t want to go to my phone and search it up. Here, the friction was lowered, it felt effortless.” 

Others reflected on the system’s potential to make “asking for help” feel natural. By embedding support into the reading process, the assistant removed the social or effortful barriers often associated with stopping to seek clarification. As P23 concluded: “It’s a better interface to just keep track of everything you’re looking at. So it’s a bit more effortless and more interactive.” 

8.0.4 Misinterpretation of Reading Behaviors . Despite re-ported benefits, participants also pointed out examples where the system had misinterpreted their gaze. Two issues emerged: (1) reread-ing or skimming was often misclassified as confusion or skipped parts that they’d need to know, and (2) internal cognitive processing could not always be captured by surface gaze data. Several participants (P4, P7, P12, P14, P18) reported examples when rereading for confirmation or connecting ideas was treated as a sign of struggle. P7 explained: “my biggest complaint about it is that sometimes it was interpreting parts that I reread as if I struggled, but actually those were the parts I understood the best.” Similarly, P4 noted: “when it said I skimmed stuff, it assumed I needed more help, but I skimmed because I already knew that topic.” P12 added: “I was comparing terms [trying to understand their connection], but instead it thought I wanted the definition of each separately.” 

Others highlighted the invisibility of internal cognition. P3 re-flected: “really, in my mind the disconnect was that I didn’t know the connection between the plates and the asthenosphere. I don’t think eye-tracking could ever pick that up.” P15 also remarked: “it’s hard to grasp the complexity between the intellectual aspect of reading and then the emotional or personal aspect that the machine can’t see.” 

## 9 Discussion 

This work examined whether a gaze-aware AI assistant with access to a user’s POV image stream could better identify and address users’ likely cognitive needs than a text-only baseline. Compared to the text-only baseline, the gaze-aware assistant produced a sig-nificant improvement in recall, was rated as substantially more accurate and more personalized, and was associated with fewer user words during the interaction. Exploratory interaction analyses further suggested that users needed to steer the conversation less and expressed confusion less often in the gaze-aware condition. These quantitative patterns were reinforced by interview data: par-ticipants repeatedly described the gaze-aware assistant as more targeted, adaptive, specific, and aligned with the exact concepts or passages they had struggled with, whereas the text-only assistant was often experienced as more generic. Taken together, these results suggest that gaze-aware multimodal assistants can make cognitive assistance feel more personally relevant while also improving some learning-related outcomes. A key interpretation of these findings is that gaze-based ground-ing may reduce the burden on users to identify, remember, and articulate where they need help. In the control condition, the as-sistant had to infer likely difficulties from the text alone, which may have produced plausible but generic support. In contrast, the gaze-aware assistant could draw on behavioral traces of hesitation, rereading, and prolonged attention to propose candidate trouble From Gaze to Guidance: Interpreting and Adapting to Users’ Cognitive Needs with Multimodal Gaze-Aware AI Assistants 

spots that were more closely tied to each participant’s actual read-ing experience. This interpretation is supported by multiple parts of our data: participants rated the gaze-based analyses as more accu-rate and more personalized; in the phase-3 comparison, a majority preferred the gaze-informed analysis; users produced significantly fewer words in the gaze-aware condition; and exploratory interac-tion analysis suggested less user steering of the conversation. The qualitative data helps explain these patterns further. Participants often said the assistant “got” the exact terms or passages they strug-gled with, and several described the interaction as more engaging precisely because the system surfaced issues they would otherwise have had to raise themselves. Rather than merely making responses more efficient, gaze-aware support may therefore shift some of the diagnostic work of help-seeking from the user to the system. The exploratory interaction results further strengthen this in-terpretation by pointing to a possible interaction-level mechanism. Across conditions, the assistant was generally able to follow the analysis and check users’ needs before explaining, which suggests that the conversational component functioned competently in both settings. The more meaningful differences appeared on the user side: participants in the gaze-aware condition appeared less likely to steer the conversation, and they were judged to express confusion less often. While these exploratory findings should be interpreted cautiously, they align well with both the reduction in user words and the interview reports that the gaze-aware assistant was more precise and less repetitive. Together, these patterns are consistent with conversations that required less repair and less user effort to redirect the assistant toward relevant content. Participants’ learning outcomes suggest that the present sys-tem’s main benefit may lie more in the targeting of assistance than in producing broad gains in learning. The most reliable differ-ence between conditions was on recall, while the definition-probe and concept-inventory measures showed only directional, non-significant improvements, and self-reported understanding changed little. One possible interpretation is that gaze-informed assistance helped participants revisit specific points of local difficulty, such as unfamiliar terminology or passages that had elicited hesitation, without necessarily supporting the kind of generative processing needed for deeper conceptual change. This reading is consistent with participants’ qualitative reports that the gaze-aware assistant often identified the exact terms or sentences they had struggled with. At the same time, the absence of clearer gains on defini-tion and concept-inventory outcomes suggests caution in claiming improved understanding more broadly. This pattern aligns with prior work showing that adaptive and conversational tutors can improve the relevance of support, but that deeper learning and transfer typically depend on instructional strategies that elicit ex-planation, elaboration, or interactive reasoning from the learner [ 9, 10 , 13 , 14 , 20 ]. Accordingly, the present findings may be best interpreted as showing that gaze-aware AI assistants can help find 

plausible trouble spots, while stronger evidence is still needed that this form of targeting alone improves higher-order understanding. Our results also make clear that gaze should not be treated as direct evidence of cognitive need. The qualitative data surfaced a recurring ambiguity: several participants reported that the sys-tem sometimes misread rereading, skimming, or cross-checking as confusion, even when those behaviors reflected verification, famil-iarity, or strategic reading. Others noted that their real difficulty lay not in a specific term they fixated on, but in a deeper con-ceptual relationship that gaze alone could not reveal. These cases matter theoretically as well as practically. They suggest that gaze is best understood as a probabilistic behavioral cue rather than a ground-truth signal of comprehension breakdown. In our sys-tem, this ambiguity may have been amplified by prompting the model to actively search for likely needs, which could encourage over-interpretation of behaviors that were only loosely related to misunderstanding. The same behavioral richness that makes gaze useful for personalization also creates risk of false positives if the system interprets all deviations from smooth reading as evidence of need. 

## 9.1 Limitations 

The study also has limitations that constrain the strength and scope of our claims. First, the materials were short, and recall perfor-mance was high in both conditions, creating some evidence of ceiling effects that may have reduced sensitivity to larger between-condition differences. Second, the control condition was a relatively strong baseline: it was not a generic chatbot, but an assistant ex-plicitly prompted to infer likely user difficulties from the text. This makes the comparison more conservative and isolates the added value of gaze-based information, but it also means the observed differences may underestimate the contrast with ordinary LLM as-sistance in everyday use. Third, the study used retrospective rather than in-the-moment intervention. Early pilot sessions with real-time interruptions revealed that the assistant frequently intervened at inopportune moments, disrupting reading flow and frustrating users (even when the underlying inference was correct). This mo-tivated our retrospective design, which reduced interruption risk and made us more able to focus on our research questions around to cognitive need identification and assistance. Future work, should extend our findings to real-time applications and measure their potential benefit. A further limitation concerns scope of generalization. Our study evaluates the proposed approach in a reading-comprehension set-ting, where attention targets are spatially anchored and potential support can be localized to words, phrases, or passages. These properties make reading a strong first testbed, but they do not nec-essarily hold in more open-ended or socially complex activities. Accordingly, our results should be interpreted as support for the feasibility of gaze-grounded assistance in tasks with localizable attentional targets, rather than as evidence that gaze can robustly identify cognitive need across all domains. 

## 9.2 Design Implications for Gaze-aware AI Assistants 

Our findings suggest several design implications for future gaze-aware and multimodal LLM assistants. 

Optimizing for targeting vs. optimizing for explanation. 

One of the clearest contributions of the gaze-aware assistant was not necessarily richer explanation quality in itself, but better tar-geting of what to explain. The gains in recall, the strong increases in perceived accuracy and personalization, the reduction in user Danry et al. 

words, and the exploratory evidence of less steering all point to the value of helping the system identify likely trouble spots more ef-fectively. Future systems should therefore treat need detection and assistance delivery as separate design problems: first identify where support may be needed, then decide how best to respond. For assis-tance delivery, instructional strategies that promote constructive engagement, such as retrieval prompts, self-explanation, Socratic questioning, or asking users to compare related concepts before providing direct clarification, have been found to more strongly affect learning transfer and could be used to improve assistance delivery [10, 16, 20]. 

Behavioral signals are suggestive, not definitive. Gaze pat-terns can help surface candidate moments of need, but they should be framed as hypotheses rather than conclusions. Systems should hedge their interpretations, confirm them with the user, and make it easy to reject or redirect an inference when it is wrong. This implication follows directly from our qualitative findings: the same gaze traces that often made support feel highly personalized could also misclassify rereading, skimming, or integrative thinking. 

Design for low-friction help-seeking without removing user agency. Participants often valued the system because it low-ered the effort required to ask for help and made clarification feel more seamless. This points to a promising role for gaze-aware assis-tance: reducing the friction of accessing support while still keeping the user in control of whether, when, and how assistance is pro-vided. Rather than interrupting aggressively, future systems may benefit from lightweight prompts, optional follow-up, and interac-tion designs that let users decide whether to explore a suspected trouble spot further. 

Support uncertainty and multiple possible readings of behavior. Because the same gaze pattern can reflect confusion, verification, familiarity, fatigue, or strategic reading, future systems should model uncertainty more explicitly. One practical approach used in this paper is to use substantial hedging in responses (“You seemed to pause here, was that because this term was unclear, or were you connecting it to something else?”) but this still re-quires an additional step and attention from the user, and will become burdensome, especially for real-time systems which may end up unnecessarily interrupting the user. Future systems should experiment with techniques to improve accuracy such as mod-eling gaze-behavior semantics for each participant; or collecting and finetuning a gaze-behavior and cognitive needs dataset and large-language model. 

## 10 Ethics, Consent, and Privacy 

Gaze-aware AI assistants raise privacy and inference risks because eye-tracking and related behavioral signals can reveal sensitive information beyond the immediate task, especially when combined with egocentric video and language-model interpretation [ 1, 21 ]. Consistent with prior ethics work on affective and behavioral AI, such signals should therefore be treated as probabilistic proxies rather than ground truth about a user’s internal state [ 21 ]. In prac-tice, this means systems should clearly communicate what is sensed and inferred, minimize retention of raw multimodal data, and give users meaningful control over when sensing is active and how data are used. Because first-person capture may also incidentally record other people and surrounding environments, privacy protections should extend beyond the primary user alone [1, 3]. 

## 11 Future Directions 

Looking forward, several avenues stand out for deepening and ex-tending this work. Longer and more varied reading materials will be crucial to reveal the selective advantage of gaze-aware systems. Whereas short, uniform passages muted differences between con-ditions, longer texts would allow generic assistants to default to exhaustive coverage, while gaze-aware AI assistants could concen-trate on the specific sections that taxed the reader. Similarly, testing with domain-specific or personally varied materials, for example, programming examples that programmers readily understand but novices do not, could better illustrate how gaze-aware systems adaptively allocate support where it is most needed. Future iterations of gaze-aware AI assistants should also incorpo-rate additional modalities to reduce misinterpretation. Physiological signals such as pupil dilation, heart rate variability, or EEG might complement gaze data to disambiguate confusion from confirma-tion or engagement. Finally, there is a broader opportunity for these systems to learn over time. Rather than treating each user session in isolation, gaze-aware cognitive assistants could gradually build a model of the user’s prior knowledge, gaze style, and associated difficulties. This might allow the system to distinguish between multiple interpre-tations and to adjust strategies accordingly. Over repeated inter-actions, the assistant could learn not only what the user struggles with, but also how they exhibit it through their behavior. 

## 12 Conclusion 

This work advances adaptive gaze-aware AI assistants as interactive systems that sense and interpret cognitive needs and adapt assis-tance accordingly. Across this design space, our study shows that gaze-aware assistance reduces steering, targets help more precisely, and improves recall, while surfacing risks that require explicit gov-ernance and meaningful user controls. We are looking towards a future where AI assistants attend to context and physiology with discretion, time assistance to the rhythm of the task, and act as trusted collaborators that lighten cognitive load, deepen under-standing, and lead to cognitive growth. 

## References               

> [1] Yasmeen Abdrabou, Süleyman Özdel, Virmarie Maquiling, Efe Bozkir, and Enkele-jda Kasneci. 2025. From gaze to data: Privacy and societal challenges of using eye-tracking data to inform GenAI models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications . 1–9. [2] Dekel Abeles and Shlomit Yuval-Greenberg. 2017. Just look away: Gaze aversions as an overt attentional disengagement mechanism. Cognition 168 (2017), 99–109. [3] Rawan Alharbi, Tammy Stump, Nilofar Vafaie, Angela Pfammatter, Bonnie Spring, and Nabil Alshurafa. 2018. I can’t be myself: effects of wearable cameras on the capture of authentic behavior in the wild. Proceedings of the ACM on interactive, mobile, wearable and ubiquitous technologies 2, 3 (2018), 1–40. [4] Michael Argyle, Mark Cook, and Duncan Cramer. 1994. Gaze and mutual gaze.
> The British Journal of Psychiatry 165, 6 (1994), 848–850. [5] Riccardo Bovo, Steven Abreu, Karan Ahuja, Eric J. Gonzalez, Li-Te Cheng, and Mar Gonzalez-Franco. 2024. EmBARDiment: an Embodied AI Agent for Produc-tivity in XR. arXiv:2408.08158 [cs.HC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.08158 [6] Richard E Boyatzis. 1998. Transforming qualitative information: Thematic analysis and code development . Sage. [7] Jennifer Choe Bush, Peter Christopher Pantelis, Xavier Morin Duchesne, Sebas-tian Alexander Kagemann, and Daniel Patrick Kennedy. 2015. Viewing complex,

From Gaze to Guidance: Interpreting and Adapting to Users’ Cognitive Needs with Multimodal Gaze-Aware AI Assistants 

dynamic scenes “through the eyes” of another person: The gaze-replay paradigm. 

PloS one 10, 8 (2015), e0134347. [8] Roser Cañigueral and Antonia F de C Hamilton. 2019. The role of eye gaze during natural social interactions in typical and autistic people. Frontiers in psychology 

10 (2019), 560. [9] Michelene TH Chi, Nicholas De Leeuw, Mei-Hung Chiu, and Christian LaVancher. 1994. Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding. Cognitive science 18, 3 (1994), 439–477. [10] Michelene TH Chi and Ruth Wylie. 2014. The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive engagement to active learning outcomes. Educational psychologist 49, 4 (2014), 219–243. [11] John W Creswell and J David Creswell. 2017. Research design: Qualitative, quan-titative, and mixed methods approaches . Sage publications. [12] Valdemar Danry, Pat Pataranutaporn, Yaoli Mao, and Pattie Maes. 2023. Don’t just tell me, ask me: Ai systems that intelligently frame explanations as questions improve human logical discernment accuracy over causal ai explanations. In 

Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–13. [13] Sidney K. D’Mello and Arthur C. Graesser. 2012. AutoTutor and Affective AutoTu-tor: Learning by Talking with Cognitively and Emotionally Intelligent Computers That Talk Back. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems 2, 4, Article 23 (2012). doi:10.1145/2395123.2395128 [14] Sidney K. D’Mello, Andrew Olney, Charles Williams, and Peter Hays. 2012. Gaze Tutor: A Gaze-Reactive Intelligent Tutoring System. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 70, 5 (2012), 377–398. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2012.01.004 [15] Gwyneth Doherty-Sneddon and Fiona G Phelps. 2005. Gaze aversion: A response to cognitive or social difficulty? Memory & cognition 33, 4 (2005), 727–733. [16] Sidney D’Mello, Blair Lehman, Reinhard Pekrun, and Art Graesser. 2014. Confu-sion can be beneficial for learning. Learning and Instruction 29 (2014), 153–170. [17] Selina N Emhardt, Margot van Wermeskerken, Katharina Scheiter, and Tamara van Gog. 2020. Inferring task performance and confidence from displays of eye movements. Applied Cognitive Psychology 34, 6 (2020), 1430–1443. [18] Alexandra Frischen, Andrew P Bayliss, and Steven P Tipper. 2007. Gaze cue-ing of attention: visual attention, social cognition, and individual differences. 

Psychological bulletin 133, 4 (2007), 694. [19] Holly Gorin, Jigna Patel, Qinyin Qiu, Alma Merians, Sergei Adamovich, and Gerard Fluet. 2024. A review of the use of gaze and pupil metrics to assess mental workload in gamified and simulated sensorimotor tasks. Sensors 24, 6 (2024), 1759. [20] Robert GM Hausmann and Kurt VanLehn. 2007. Explaining self-explaining: A contrast between content and generation. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications 158 (2007), 417. [21] Javier Hernandez, Josh Lovejoy, Daniel McDuff, Jina Suh, Tim O’Brien, Arathi Sethumadhavan, Gretchen Greene, Rosalind W Picard, and Mary Czerwinski. 2021. Guidelines for Assessing and Minimizing Risks of Emotion Recognition Applications.. In ACII . 1–8. [22] Roy S Hessels, Antje Nuthmann, Marcus Nyström, Richard Andersson, Dieder-ick C Niehorster, and Ignace TC Hooge. 2024. The fundamentals of eye tracking part 1: The link between theory and research question. Behavior Research Methods 

57, 1 (2024), 16. [23] David Hestenes, Malcolm Wells, Gregg Swackhamer, et al . 1992. Force concept inventory. The physics teacher 30, 3 (1992), 141–158. [24] Roland S Johansson, Göran Westling, Anders Bäckström, and J Randall Flanagan. 2001. Eye–hand coordination in object manipulation. Journal of neuroscience 21, 17 (2001), 6917–6932. [25] Jeffrey D Karpicke and Henry L Roediger III. 2008. The critical importance of retrieval for learning. science 319, 5865 (2008), 966–968. [26] Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02406 (2022). [27] Peter König, Niklas Wilming, Tim C Kietzmann, Jose P Ossandón, Selim Onat, Benedikt V Ehinger, Ricardo R Gameiro, and Kai Kaspar. 2016. Eye movements as a window to cognitive processes. Journal of eye movement research 9, 5 (2016), 25. [28] Sébastien Lallé, Cristina Conati, and Giuseppe Carenini. 2016. Predicting Confu-sion in Information Visualization from Eye Tracking and Interaction Data.. In 

IJCAI . 2529–2535. [29] Moritz Langner, Peyman Toreini, and Alexander Maedche. 2023. Leveraging eye tracking technology for a situation-aware writing assistant. In Proceedings of the 2023 Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications . 1–2. [30] Jaewook Lee, Jun Wang, Elizabeth Brown, Liam Chu, Sebastian S Rodriguez, and Jon E Froehlich. 2024. GazePointAR: A context-aware multimodal voice assistant for pronoun disambiguation in wearable augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–20. [31] Jia Zheng Lim, James Mountstephens, and Jason Teo. 2020. Emotion recognition using eye-tracking: taxonomy, review and current challenges. Sensors 20, 8 (2020), 2384. [32] Gwen Marchand and Ellen A Skinner. 2007. Motivational dynamics of children’s academic help-seeking and concealment. Journal of Educational Psychology 99, 1 (2007), 65. [33] Diane C Mézière, Niilo E Hautala, Timo T Heikkilä, and Johanna K Kaakinen. 2025. Eye-movement markers of mind wandering during reading: A meta-analysis. 

Memory & Cognition (2025), 1–26. [34] Chiara Mirandola, Alfonso Ciriello, Martina Gigli, and Cesare Cornoldi. 2018. Metacognitive monitoring of text comprehension: An investigation on post-dictive judgments in typically developing children and children with reading comprehension difficulties. Frontiers in psychology 9 (2018), 2253. [35] William E Nagy, Patricia A Herman, and Richard C Anderson. 1985. Learning words from context. Reading research quarterly (1985), 233–253. [36] Paul Nation and David Beglar. 2007. A vocabulary size test. (2007). [37] Mariya Pachman, Amaël Arguel, Lori Lockyer, Gregor Kennedy, and Jason Lodge. 2016. Eye tracking and early detection of confusion in digital learning environ-ments: Proof of concept. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 32, 6 (2016). [38] Taiying Peng, Jiacheng Hua, Miao Liu, and Feng Lu. 2025. In the eye of mllm: Benchmarking egocentric video intent understanding with gaze-guided prompt-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07447 (2025). [39] Alexander Plopski, Teresa Hirzle, Nahal Norouzi, Long Qian, Gerd Bruder, and Tobias Langlotz. 2022. The eye in extended reality: A survey on gaze interaction and eye tracking in head-worn extended reality. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 

55, 3 (2022), 1–39. [40] Jun Rekimoto. 2025. GazeLLM: Multimodal LLMs incorporating human visual attention. In Proceedings of the Augmented Humans International Conference 2025 .302–311. [41] Jayasankar Santhosh, Andreas Dengel, and Shoya Ishimaru. 2024. Gaze-driven adaptive learning system with ChatGPT-generated summaries. IEEE Access 12 (2024), 173714–173733. [42] Gabriel Herbert Sarch, Balasaravanan Thoravi Kumaravel, Sahithya Ravi, Vibhav Vineet, and Andrew D Wilson. 2025. Grounding Task Assistance with Mul-timodal Cues from a Single Demonstration. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 . 12807–12833. [43] Katharina Scheiter, Carina Schubert, Anne Schüler, Holger Schmidt, Gottfried Zimmermann, Benjamin Wassermann, Marie-Christin Krebs, and Thérése Eder. 2019. Adaptive multimedia: Using gaze-contingent instructional guidance to provide personalized processing support. Computers & Education 139 (2019), 31–47. [44] Thimo Schulz, Chiara Krisam, and Julia Seitz. 2025. EyeGPT: A Cognitive Load-Adaptive GenAI Assistant with Eye Tracking for Programming Education. In 

NeuroIS Retreat . Springer, 45–55. [45] John L Sibert, Mehmet Gokturk, and Robert A Lavine. 2000. The reading assistant: eye gaze triggered auditory prompting for reading remediation. In Proceedings of the 13th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology .101–107. [46] Julie Dangremond Stanton, Amanda J Sebesta, and John Dunlosky. 2021. Fos-tering metacognition to support student learning and performance. CBE—Life Sciences Education 20, 2 (2021), fe3. [47] Enkeleda Thaqi, Mohamed Omar Mantawy, and Enkelejda Kasneci. 2024. SARA: Smart AI reading assistant for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 2024 Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications . 1–3. [48] Margot van Wermeskerken, Damien Litchfield, and Tamara van Gog. 2018. What am I looking at? Interpreting dynamic and static gaze displays. Cognitive science 

42, 1 (2018), 220–252. [49] Pierre Vermersch. 1994. The explicitation interview. French original ESF (1994). [50] Ru Wang, Zach Potter, Yun Ho, Daniel Killough, Linxiu Zeng, Sanbrita Mondal, and Yuhang Zhao. 2024. GazePrompt: Enhancing Low Vision People’s Reading Experience with Gaze-Aware Augmentations. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–17. [51] Xin Wang, Taein Kwon, Mahdi Rad, Bowen Pan, Ishani Chakraborty, Sean An-drist, Dan Bohus, Ashley Feniello, Bugra Tekin, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, et al . 2023. Holoassist: an egocentric human interaction dataset for interactive ai assistants in the real world. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 20270–20281. [52] Haowei Zhang, Jianzhe Liu, Zhen Han, Shuo Chen, Bailan He, Volker Tresp, Zhiqiang Xu, and Jindong Gu. 2024. Visual question decomposition on multi-modal large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 . 1926–1949. [53] Jiarui Zhang, Mahyar Khayatkhoei, Prateek Chhikara, and Filip Ilievski. 2023. Visual cropping improves zero-shot question answering of multimodal large language models. In R0-FoMo: Robustness of Few-shot and Zero-shot Learning in Large Foundation Models .[54] Yichi Zhang, Xin Luna Dong, Zhaojiang Lin, Andrea Madotto, Anuj Kumar, Babak Damavandi, Joyce Chai, and Seungwhan Moon. 2025. Proactive assistant dialogue generation from streaming egocentric videos. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 12055–12079. Danry et al.     

> [55] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al .2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in neural information processing systems 36 (2023), 46595–46623.

## A Prompt Templates and Examples 

For reproducibility, we provide the exact prompts used in our sys-tem. Each was implemented as a Python function that inserted task-specific variables (e.g., text, gaze wordlist). We group them into three categories: (i) gaze-based analysis, (ii) text-only analysis, and (iii) conversational assistant. 

## A.1 Eye Tracking Analysis Prompt 

The user is about to engage in a conversation with a helpful , personalized chatbot after reading the paragraph : { paragraph_content } The user was also looking at the following content with timestamps : { eye_tracking_wordlist } # Eye tracking : Were there fixations ( words in the same sentence looked at repeatedly across seconds )? Regressions ( returning to previous sentences )? Staring away after a concept ? Skipping any content ( sentences in the paragraph not present in the wordlist )? If no significant ones , state so . # Need help ( if any ): Based on the most pressing findings , list any struggles where the user significantly showed areaction that might require help . Instructions : Use quantitative observations whenever possible ( seconds of fixations , regressions , etc .) and align observations with the content it was a reaction to . 

## A.2 Paragraph-Only Context Analysis Prompt 

The user is about to engage in a conversation with a helpful , personalized chatbot after reading the paragraph . { paragraph } # Analysis : What is the user most likely to have struggled with ? # Need help ( if any ): Based on your analysis . 

## A.3 Real-Time Intervention Variant 

... [ same as Eye Tracking Analysis Prompt ] ... Describe any changes , when they occurred , and what intervention ( if any ) might be needed . Return the output in JSON with the following fields : - observations : [...] , - need_help : [...] , - intervention : " Brief opening message the assistant should say if an intervention is needed , otherwise 'none '." 

## A.4 Assistant Prompt 

You are a voice assistant that helps people overcome struggles when reading paragraphs . The user just read the following paragraph : { paragraph } Below is an analysis of their reading behavior and attention patterns : { analysis_results } YOUR INSTRUCTIONS : - Have a natural , dialogic conversation that helps the user reflect on key ideas and clarify any confusion . - Tone : Open - ended , Socratic , concise ( <20 s per turn ). - Be transparent : hedge your inferences (" might ", " seems ") . - Use the analysis as subtle guidance , starting with what they most likely struggled with . Confirm with the user before moving on . 

## B LLM Analysis Samples B.1 Example of Generic LLM Analysis 

The paragraph introduces several advanced concepts from quantum mechanics and the philosophy of physics, including: 

• Superdeterminism as a loophole in Bell’s theorem 

• The idea of local hidden-variable theories 

• The concept of measurement independence 

• The correlation between measurement settings and hid-den variables 

The user is most likely to have struggled with: (1) Understanding Bell’s theorem and its assumptions :The theorem is a foundational but complex result in quan-tum mechanics, and its assumptions (like measurement independence) may not be familiar to all readers. (2) The meaning of superdeterminism : The idea that mea-surement settings and hidden variables could be correlated From Gaze to Guidance: Interpreting and Adapting to Users’ Cognitive Needs with Multimodal Gaze-Aware AI Assistants 

(thus violating measurement independence) is counterintu-itive and philosophically challenging. (3) How superdeterminism allows for local hidden-variable theories to reproduce quantum predictions : This is a subtle point that requires understanding both the mathe-matics and the philosophical implications. (4) Terminology : Terms like "local causality," "hidden vari-ables," "measurement independence," and "Bell inequalities" may be unfamiliar or confusing. 

Need help (if any) : Yes, the user would likely benefit from help, especially with: 

• A simple explanation of Bell’s theorem and its assumptions. 

• What measurement independence means and why it’s im-portant. 

• How superdeterminism changes the usual interpretation. 

• An example or analogy to clarify the correlation between measurement settings and hidden variables. 

Summary : The user is likely to need help understanding the technical terms and the conceptual leap involved in superdetermin-ism, particularly how it relates to Bell’s theorem and measurement independence." 

## B.2 Example of Eye Tracking LLM Analysis 

Fixations (repeated looks within the same idea/sentence) 

• Superdeterminism (heading and opening sentence): 6 looks at 10s, 47s (twice), 48s (twice), 55s. 

• theorem/theorem. (Bell’s theorem references across sen-tences): frequent returns at 12s, 33s, 49s, 52s, 53s (twice), 62s, 77s. 

• correlated (correlations with measurement settings): con-centrated looks at 43s (twice), 53s, 54s, 68s. 

• variables/determine/relation near measurement indepen-dence: variables at 18s, 42s, 94s; determine at 38s, 93s; rela-tion at 37s, 92s; independence at 95s. 

• models/hidden-variable: models at 27s, 30s, 83s, 85s; hidden /hidden-variable at 78s, 79s, 24s. 

Regressions (going back to earlier content) :

• After an initial pass through the opening (10s), gaze re-turned to earlier terms around 47s (Superdeterminism, the-orem, correlated, all), indicating re-reading of the intro and key claims.’ 

• Late-session returns to earlier assumptions (62s) and then to the measurement-independence clause (92s). 

• Off-text glances (staring at a wall analog) 

• Brief looks to the monitor bezel/hardware at 46s and again at 61s ( 1 second each), away from any on-screen word. 

Skipping content 

• No clear skipping. Every sentence of the paragraph appears to have at least one word fixated. The user also looked at the on-screen instruction line (Please read "When you have finished" at 44s. 

• Overall reading behavior 

• Typical for dense technical text: initial pass, targeted re-reads of key assumptions and definitions, and a final focus on measurement independence. No signs of major difficulty. 

Need help (if any): 

• Clarifying measurement independence (last focal point at 92s): It means the choice of measurement settings is statis-tically independent of the hidden variables that influence outcomes. Superdeterminism denies this independence by positing built-in correlations between settings and hidden variables. 

• Connecting local causality with Bell-inequality violation under superdeterminism: Because settings and hidden vari-ables are correlated, the usual Bell assumptions don’t all hold, so a local hidden-variable model can match quantum predictions without signaling. 

• Toy models and what they show: If helpful, I can give a brief, concrete example of a superdeterministic toy model and what assumptions it uses. Would you like a quick plain-language summary of the para-graph, a short diagram of the Bell assumptions (including measure-ment independence), or an example toy model?" 

## C Examples of Questions D LLM-as-a-Judge - Classifier descriptions                                                                                     

> behaviors_nested ={" needs_addressed ": {" description ": " For each difficulty flagged in the eye - tracking analysis under 'Need help ( if any ) ',check whether the assistant addressed it in the conversation . Return aJSON object with 'needs_identified '( list of needs ) and 'needs_addressed '( list of booleans indicating if each need was addressed ) ." , " example ": " Assistant explained inflation calculation when analysis showed user struggled with measurement details ", " response_format ": {" needs_identified ": [" Understanding inflation measurement ( CPI , core vs headline )", " Historical context of 1970 s inflation crisis ", " Definition of inflation hawks " ], " needs_addressed ": [ True , False , False ], " total_needs ": 3, " addressed_count ": 1, " score ": "1/3" }}}behaviors ={" aligned_with_analysis ": {" description ": " Did the assistant 'sfirst turn align with the analysis ?" ,

Danry et al. 

Table 1: Samples of multiple-choice assessment items by inventory type (Recall, Definition Probe, Concept Inventory) for the main study topics. Correct options are marked with an asterisk (*). Full items can be found in [GitHub repository link anonymized for review]                                   

> Item Type Topic Question Stem ABCDRecall Inflation Inflation refers to the rate at which ... wages fall money supply shrinks prices rise* debt grows Recall Plate Tectonics The layer beneath the lithosphere is called the ... lower crust asthenosphere* outer core biosphere Definition Probe Inflation An inflation hawk is ... trader buying gold in reces-sions citizen anti-food-tax lobby policymaker prioritizing low inflation even over growth* energy market index Definition Probe Plate Tectonics In geology, mafic rocks are ... rich in Mg and Fe (dark)* silica-rich and light-colored frozen seawater crystals formed only by asteroid im-pacts Concept Inventory Inflation Cost-push inflation arises chiefly when ... demand outpaces supply input costs (e.g., wages/oil) rise* taxes are cut exports surge Concept Inventory Plate Tectonics Plate motion is primarily driven by ... Earth rotation mantle convection and slab pull* lunar tides magnetic storms

" example ": " Assistant referenced the skipped sentence that the analysis flagged ." , "0": " not_aligned ", "1": " aligned " }, " asked_guiding_questions ": {" description ": " Did the assistant ask guiding , open - ended questions ?" , " example ": " What do you think the author meant by `` systemic risk ' ' ?" , "0": " not_asked ", "1": " asked " }, " checked_user_needs ": {" description ": " Did the assistant confirm the user 's needs before explaining ?" , " example ": " It seems like the second sentence might have been tricky , is that the part you 'd like to go over ?" , "0": " not_checked ", "1": " checked " }, " used_hedging ": {" description ": " Did the assistant hedge its inferences with words like ' might '

or ' seems '?" , " example ": " It seems you might have skimmed over this part ." , "0": " no_hedging ", "1": " hedging_used " }, " was_concise ": {" description ": " Were the assistant 's turns concise ( <20 s spoken ) ?" , " example ": " Short reflection and question , not a long lecture ." , "0": " not_concise ", "1": " concise " }, " monitored_comprehension ": {" description ": " Did the assistant check whether the user understood before moving on ?" , " example ": " Does that explanation make sense to you ?" , "0": " not_monitored ", "1": " monitored " }, " stayed_on_topic ": {" description ": " Did the assistant stay on topic and avoid introducing unrelated content ?" , " example ": " Assistant focused on the paragraph content without diverging to other subjects ." , "0": " not_stayed_on_topic ", "1": " stayed_on_topic " }, " user_changed_focus ": { # user behaviors " description ": " Did the user change the topic or focus of the conversation away from the identified needs ?" , " example ": " User shifted the discussion to a different part of the paragraph , concept or a new topic entirely ." , "0": " not_changed_focus ", "1": " changed_focus " }, " user_expressed_confusion ": {" description ": " Did the user express confusion or misunderstanding about the paragraph content ?" , " example ": " User said they were confused about a specific term or concept in the paragraph ." , "0": " not_expressed_confusion ", "1": " expressed_confusion " }, " user_engagement_with_assistant ": {" description ": " Did the user actively engage with the assistant 's questions and prompts ?" , From Gaze to Guidance: Interpreting and Adapting to Users’ Cognitive Needs with Multimodal Gaze-Aware AI Assistants 

" example ": " User responded thoughtfully to the assistant 's questions , indicating active engagement ." , "0": " not_engaged ", "1": " engaged " }, # what else couldve gone wrong / right ? " user_reflected_on_content ": {" description ": " Did the user reflect on the paragraph content during the conversation ?" , " example ": " User made comments or observations about the paragraph , indicating reflection ." , "0": " not_reflected ", "1": " reflected " }, " user_took_lead ": {" description ": " Did the user take the lead in steering the conversation ?" , " example ": " User initiated topics or questions related to the paragraph without prompting from the assistant ." , "0": " not_took_lead ", "1": " took_lead " }, " user_requested_clarification ": {" description ": " Did the user request clarification on any points during the conversation ?" , " example ": " User asked the assistant to clarify or elaborate on certain explanations ." , "0": " not_requested_clarification ", "1": " requested_clarification " }, "user_agreeing_with_assistants_identification_of_their_needs ": {" description ": " Did the user agree with the assistant 's identification of their needs ?" , " example ": " User confirmed that the assistant accurately identified their need for clarification ." , "0": " not_agreed ", "1": " agreed " }, "user_disagreeing_with_assistants_identification_of_their_needs ": {" description ": " Did the user disagree with the assistant 's identification of their needs ?" , " example ": " User stated that the assistant misunderstood their needs or focus ." , "0": " not_disagreed ", "1": " disagreed " }, " user_lost_interest ": {" description ": " Did the user lose interest in the conversation ?" , " example ": " User gave short , disengaged responses or indicated boredom ." , "0": " not_lost_interest ", "1": " lost_interest " }, " user_needed_more_help ": {" description ": " Did the user indicate they needed more help than what was provided ?" , " example ": " User expressed that they still had questions or confusion after the assistant 's explanations ." , "0": " not_needed_more_help ", "1": " needed_more_help " }, " user_found_explanations_helpful ": {" description ": " Did the user find the assistant 's explanations helpful ?" , " example ": " User expressed that the explanations clarified their understanding of the paragraph ." , "0": " not_found_helpful ", "1": " found_helpful " }}

## E Additional Results Danry et al. 

Figure 5: Exploratory results showing NASA TLX across conditions, with standard errors. 

Figure 6: Exploratory results for sanity check questions and HLMIQ responses. From Gaze to Guidance: Interpreting and Adapting to Users’ Cognitive Needs with Multimodal Gaze-Aware AI Assistants 

Figure 7: Rated accuracy of AI analysis in phase 3 between control and experimental differed based on text difficulty, with the easier texts showing bigger differences between conditions. 

Figure 8: Conceptual overview of system user experience with AI interpretations of gaze behavior. Top row: What is captured with the eye tracking and front-facing cameras. Middle: LLM analysis about the user’s current cognitive-emotional reactions to the content. Bottom: Suggested AI interventions. Danry et al. 

Figure 9: Overview of study procedure and timing across phases.