Title: surprisal is Not a Theory

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.20208v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Jul 2026 01:15:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 40

Markdown Content:
# surprisal is Not a Theory 

Andrés Buxó-Lugo a, Aniello De Santo b, Morgan Grobol c, Ryan J. Hubbard d, Cassandra L. Jacobs a, ∗

> aUniversity at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA
> bUniversity of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
> cUniversité Paris Nanterre, Paris, France
> dUniversity at Albany, Albany, NY, USA

Abstract 

Surprisal Theory is often characterized as a computational-level explanation per (Marr, 1982). We argue in this work that, even though a computational-level narrative has been used to support “representation-agnostic” research within computational psycholinguistics, the movement toward black box sys-tems embodied by large language models (LLMs) does not exempt modelers using the surprisal metric from the representational decisions required by computational-level characterizations. In fact, we argue that the uncritical use of LLM-surprisal obfuscates the representational and algorithmic-level commitments of different models. In three analyses, we show that the choice of algorithm and model architecture play significant roles in the computation of language model probabilities. We advise that researchers who wish to test Surprisal Theory re-evaluate the practice of treating large language model probabilities as interchangeable. 

Keywords: surprisal, multiple realizability, theory-building 

1. Introduction 

The extent to which predictability plays a fundamental role in human sentence processing is one of the central questions of modern (computational) psycholinguistics. In this respect, Hale (2001) pioneered the use of statistical   

> ∗Corresponding author
> ∗∗ All authors contributed equally.
> Email address: cxjacobs@buffalo.edu (Cassandra L. Jacobs) arXiv:2607.20208v1 [cs.CL] 22 Jul 2026

parsing algorithms as models of human incremental sentence processing. Hale proposed that a monotonic relationship should exist between the probabilities assigned to structural options for incomplete sentences by a probabilistic parser and reading times in word-by-word self-paced reading. This approach was further refined by Levy (2008), who leveraged empirical methods to estimate syntactic probabilities from treebank corpora to support a model of processing complexity as a resource allocation problem. These two papers formed the foundation for Surprisal Theory , which broadly applies Shannon’s (1948) Information Theory framework to human language use. At its core, Surprisal Theory aims to offer a direct linking hypothesis between cognitive effort during language processing and properties of the linguistic input. Concretely, this linking hypothesis takes the form of a com-plexity metric —surprisal 1 — operationalized by calculating the negative log probability of an event – for instance, observing a word given N preceding words. This metric can be understood as a measure of how “expected”, and therefore “effortful”, the linguistic event was to process. Intuitively, if a word is very unexpected in a sentence, then surprisal will be high, and read-ing times will be longer. Futrell et al. (2020) helpfully formulate this claim as follows: 

𝐷 surprisal (𝑤 𝑖 ∣ 𝑐) ∝ − log 𝑝(𝑤 𝑖 ∣ 𝑐) (1) where 𝐷 stands for the difficulty of a word 𝑤 𝑖 in a particular context 𝑐 .Since the formulation of Surprisal Theory Hale (2001), researchers have evaluated the validity of the theory primarily by correlating surprisal with measures of behavioral phenomena that are of interest to psycholinguistic researchers, and are believed to reflect cognitive effort (e.g. reading times). Through these effors, many papers have claimed that the empirical evidence supports Surprisal Theory as an omnibus account of processing difficulty (Michaelov et al., 2024; Shain et al., 2024; Smith and Levy, 2013), though see a.o. Huang et al. (2024) and Slaats and Martin (2025). Given this ap-parent empirical success of Surprisal Theory, it is worth revisiting how it has advanced our understanding of the phenomenon under study: the mecha-nisms underlying sentence processing. 

> 1Through the paper, we follow Staub (2025) and Slaats and Martin (2025) in using upper-case Surprisal to refer to the conceptual, theoretical framework of Surprisal Theory, and lower-case surprisal to refer to the specific operationalized metric.

2Initial formulations of Surprisal Theory made explicit commitments to ex-planatory components of the language processing system (Hale, 2001, 2016). This earlier work paid particular attention to the kind of probabilities that were being estimated, and how the process of obtaining them (e.g. from n-grams, CFG parsers, etc) was informed by the representational assumptions of different linguistic theories. More recently however, the term “language model” has predominantly shifted from referring to models built on n-gram statistics (Smith and Levy, 2013) and parser probabilities to contemporary neural network-based (large) language models (LLMs; Bengio et al., 2003), and has similarly expanded the range of models used to estimate probabilities in psycholinguistics. Currently, Surprisal Theory is often essentially equated with (transformations of) probabilities extracted from LLMs as measures of cognitive effort. Indeed, our understanding of the relationship between pro-cessing speed and probabilistic processing has been increasingly argued to be possible to observe because of the power of larger, neural language models to estimate surprisal (Goodkind and Bicknell, 2018; Shain et al., 2024). Simultaneous with this change in methodology, the field has moved away from trying to understand measurable effects caused by experimental ma-nipulations as a window into the function of complex cognitive capacities, and toward “fitting” models of such effects (Cummins, 2000; van Rooij and Baggio, 2020, 2021). That is, much recent work has ignored the search for ex-planatory processes in favor of developing increasingly powerful predictors of psychophysical measures (i.e., predictive power, or PP ; Goodkind and Bick-nell, 2018; Kuribayashi et al., 2021; Wilcox et al., 2023). 2 It is now common to see research articles compute surprisal measure from dozens to hundreds of language models and, assuming that they are interchangeable, use them to study whether a word’s predictability in context reflects processing difficulty (Shain et al., 2024; Timkey et al., 2025; Wilcox et al., 2020, 2021). The practice of treating the predictive power of different LLMs are inter-changeable is sometimes justified by the belief that “representation-agnosticism” (Futrell et al., 2020) is a desirable consequence of using LLMs to estimate surprisal in accounts of psycholinguistic behavior. Futrell et al. (2020) sum-marize this claim as: 

> 2We are not alone in our observation that the increasing technical focus on PP has limited the field’s ability to generate insights into deep theoretical questions about neural language models and psycholinguistic theory (see e.g., Castro, 2025 for a highly similar development in reinforcement learning theory).

3In addition to providing an intuitive information-theoretic and Bayesian view of language processing, surprisal theory has the theoretical advantage of being representation-agnostic: The sur-prisal of a word in its context gives the amount of work required to update a probability distribution over any latent structures that must be inferred from an utterance. These structures could be syntactic parse trees, semantic parses, data structures repre-senting discourse variables, or distributed vector-space represen-tations. This representation-agnosticism is possible because the ultimate form of the processing cost function […] depends only on the word and its context, and the latent representation literally does not enter into the equation.. (Futrell et al., 2020) It is tempting, under a fitting-centric modeling paradigm, to infer that surprisal is derived directly from words and abstracted from intermediate representations, such as syntax. However, we see representation-agnosticism as directly related to the problem of multiple realizability (Fodor, 1974; Put-nam, 1967). In reality, the surprisal measures that are calculated by dif-ferent end-to-end black box language models rely on substantially different latent structures that are strongly conditioned by model design, and these latent structures in turn condition the information that is implicitly used to compute surprisal. In other words, while LLM-based surprisal can be super-ficially similar across models, each model is algorithmically distinct and uses different types of information present in the input. Consequently, this has led many researchers to engage in a practice of searching for the best-fitting LMs through model comparison (Shain et al., 2024; Oh and Linzen, 2026) While it might be possible to compute estimates of surprisal without having to pay explicit attention to representations, assumptions about repre-sentations are baked into the computation of the metric and should thus be an explicit concern to computational modelers invested in explanatory theory building. Accordingly, the assumption that surprisal estimates from different models are interchangeably encoding the same abstract linking hypothesis is only theoretically valid if the metric is actually computed in functionally equivalent ways across models. Functional equivalence allows for incidental properties like differences in training data but requires that all subsequent processing remain identical (Rogers, 2021). Additionally, the latent repre-sentations should alter neither the “shape” of the cost function nor what that function encodes (Futrell et al., 2020). 4In this paper, we argue that these assumptions are is in fact not wholly valid and are a consequence of a naive computationalist lens (Guest and Martin, 2023, 2025). We also illustrate that the “black box” problem com-bined with outsourcing the computation of surprisal to LLMs diminishes the explanatory potential of Surprisal Theory, since different LLMs instantiate different implementations of the linking hypothesis between probabilities and effort. We explore these issues with a series of experiments probing the inner workings of popular models used in the literature, which casts doubt on the viability of representation-agnosticism. We then present a critique of current trends in computational psycholinguistics informed by an understanding of Marr’s (1982) levels of explanation, and of the goals of computational cogni-tive models (Embick and Poeppel, 2015; Guest and Martin, 2021). Finally, we examine claims that (a) Surprisal Theory as encoded by sur-prisal is a computational-level description of the language comprehension process (Hale, 2016; Futrell and Levy, 2017; though see Hoover et al., 2023; Schuler and Yue, 2024), and (b) that the successes of LLM-surprisal metrics have been informative in advancing theories of sentence processing. In light of these considerations, we propose that researchers who wish to advance Surprisal Theory as an account of sentence processing must move beyond the dominant data-fitting paradigm, and explicitly evaluate the assumptions underlying the models they use to operationalize surprisal estimates. 

Experiments 

In Experiment 1, we show that while predictions from different LLMs correlate well with human behavior in one psycholinguistic task, these pre-dictions evolve across layers in very different ways, and these strong corre-lations are primarily driven by higher-probability observations. In Exper-iment 2, we demonstrate through an analysis of the LLMs’ hidden states that the types of representations that LLMs produce during the predic-tion process are starkly different. The results of both Experiments pro-vide evidence that different language models encode lexical information in different ways across their hidden states. We discuss these findings with re-spect to representation-agnosticism in Surprisal Theory and Computational-level accounts of language processing. We include data and visualization scripts from all Experiments on the Open Science Foundation project page (https://osf.io/n8kb3/overview ). 5Table 1: Example preambles and human completions from Peelle et al.’s (2020) cloze norms.                 

> Preamble Ans 1 Ans 2 Ans 3 Ans 4 He hated bees and feared encountering a hive swarm bee nest The baby’s face puckered when she ate something sour salty bitter slimy Hearing noises from above, the confused man inspected the attic ceiling roof sky

2. Experiment 1: Evolution of lexical predictability across layers 

The goal of Experiment 1 is to assess how language models assign prob-abilities to future outcomes across layers by comparing their behavior to humans in a similar task. For the human data, we conceptualize predictabil-ity using cloze probabilities, which measure for a particular sentence context the proportion of human guesses that correspond to a particular word. The shift among psycholinguists to focus on incremental (word-by-word) process-ing in tasks such as self-paced reading(Aaronson and Scarborough, 1976) and rapid serial visual presentation (Kieras and Just, 1984) has led to a growth in cloze corpora (De Varda et al., 2023; Jacobs et al., 2025; Luke and Christian-son, 2016; Peelle et al., 2020) that can provide a lens through which we can interpret language model probabilities. We stratify human cloze responses along their cloze probabilities in order to probe the layerwise computation of language model probabilities for sentence-final completions. 

2.1. Data 

We focus our analyses here on Peelle et al.’s (2020) cloze norms. This dataset contains 3085 sentences and approximately 52 000 unique, mostly sentence-final, cloze responses that vary in their sentential constraint, or the degree to which the final word could be predicted by the upstream context. That is, the sentences were designed to elicit varying degrees of agreement about the identity of the most likely completion of that sentence. The dataset includes cloze probabilities for each preamble and other production statistics, which are aggregated across participants as a proportion of a word given the preceding context. We include sample sentences and their top completions in Table 1. 

2.2. Models 

We examine three Transformer language models commonly used in the Surprisal Theory literature that are roughly equivalent in the number of pa-6rameters that they use to solve linguistic prediction tasks. Specifically, we select models that are similar in size to GPT-2, due to reports that this model produces the strongest correlations with measures of sentence processing ef-fort (Shain et al., 2024; Oh and Schuler, 2024; Nair and Resnik, 2023). Some work has indicated that there are also diminishing returns with respect to the strength of correlation that can be obtained in psycholinguistics, such that larger models may fail to produce appropriate predictability estimates (Oh and Schuler, 2023), and recent literature has come to use these systems as a baseline. These models are also useful for understanding the computations that may be made by even larger, more complex systems because the training regimes that supported the development of earlier models are still engaged when training larger, more contemporary ”foundation models” (Bommasani et al., 2022). We rely on two decoder-only models, Pythia-160M (Biderman et al., 2023) and GPT-2 (small size; Radford et al., 2019), which perform the task of next-word prediction, taking a sequence of words as input, and outputting a probability distribution over the possible values for the next token in the sentence. For these models, we can easily compute each model’s predictions by assessing the predictions at each token. The third model, RoBERTa (“base” size; Liu et al., 2019), is an encoder-only Transformer model, and is trained as a masked language model that produces probabilities for masked tokens at arbitrary positions in a complete sentence, taking into account both the left- and right-context. For RoBERTa, we obtain next-word probabilities given a partial sentence by applying a mask token to a sentence fragment and probing the model’s guesses at that token. This procedure of extracting next-token probabilities slightly deviates from the training regime. Beyond the training objectives that distinguish the encoder and decoder model families, another interesting architectural difference across the models is the nature of the input and output transformations. The unembedding matrix 𝑈 is responsible for transforming the compressed hidden state repre-sentation of the context into probability distribution over tokens; the embed-ding matrix 𝐸 transforms tokens into hidden state representations. GPT-2 and RoBERTa require, as an architectural constraint, that the embedding matrix that produces the initial embeddings of tokens be to the transpose of the unembedding matrix 𝑈 used by their language modelling heads to transform the output of their last hidden layer into a score distribution over their vocabulary, a technique known as tied embeddings (Press & Wolf, 2017). Pythia, on the other hand, is not trained with this requirement, and therefore 7separates the embedding and unembedding matrices. In this experiment, we conduct two probing studies. To assess the re-lationship between human cloze and language model probabilities, and par-ticularly the computation of next-word prediction, we apply the “logit lens” technique (Dar et al., 2023), which produces a distribution of activations of potential states. We first examine how the language model logits correlate to human cloze probabilities across layers (Study 1.1) Then, we examine the logits themselves across the different models, targeting words of differing levels of predictability (Study 1.2). 

2.3. Study 1.1: Layerwise correlation of cloze probabilities to language model probabilities 

The first analysis assesses how the LM probabilities across layers correlate with human cloze probabilities, then zooms into a comparison between the first and later layers of GPT-2, which we illustrate in Figure 1 and Figure 2, respectively. In this first analysis we compute the correlation between Peelle et al.’s (2020) cloze probabilities and the three LLM’s probabilities. As expected given the surface similarity between the cloze and LLM prediction task, we obtain high item-level correlations depending on the layer and LLM. The cor-relations typically become stronger from layer to layer, with the highest cor-relations uniformly at the final layers across Pythia, GPT-2, and RoBERTa, suggesting that the layerwise computation occurring within LLMs transforms its representations toward the prediction objective, a pattern we present in Figure 1. Spearman’s correlation is the most appropriate measure to use here due to the bounded range of the data, and the strongest correlation to cloze probabilities of 0.452 comes from the final layer for Pythia. We observe slightly weaker correlations when measuring Pearson’s correlation at 0.425 for the same model and layer. The correlation between the probabilities at the final layer of both Pythia and GPT-2 is extremely high (Pearson’s 𝜌 is 0.92). In spite of the promisingly strong correlation between human cloze re-sponses and LLM probabilities, a closer inspection reveals important points of divergence between human and machine next-word predictions. The cor-respondence between human and LM behavior is not homogenous across pre-dictions, such that there is less agreement (greater error) between humans and LMs at lower-probability tokens, possibly partially due to sparsity in the human responses. A median split analysis demonstrates that while the 8Figure 1: Spearman’s correlation between word model-estimated surprisal and cloze prob-ability, across models and layers. 

correlations are stronger at higher cloze probability levels ( 𝐵 upper = 0.04 ,

𝑡(35456) = 45.78 , 𝑝 < 0.001 ) ,the item-level correspondences are highly vari-abl, replicating a prior finding from Jacobs and McCarthy (2020). Figure 2 illustrates this for GPT-2. We include the analogous plots for RoBERTa and Pythia in Appendix A. 

2.4. Study 1.2: Layerwise encoding of next-word probabilities across models 

The pattern of results from Study 1.1 becomes more interesting when we consider that the layerwise computation of next-token probabilities is pos-sible because each layer partially preserves linguistic information from prior layers, but that different language models likely produce surprisal estimates in very distinct ways. This difference between language models is what we aim to investigate in this second analysis. In Study 1.2, we again apply the logit lens to each layer of RoBERTa, Pythia-160M, and GPT-2 and probe 9Figure 2: Demonstration of correlation between language model and human cloze prob-ability in Peelle et al.’s (2020) completion norms for GPT-2’s first and final layers. Dark points represent cloze level-specific means; lighter points represent item-specific values. Solid line represents 𝑦 = 𝑥 , indicating a perfect correlation. Model probabilities are faceted by layer (first on the left vs. last on the right). 

how the specific activations (language model probabilties) of different lexical predictions emerge in each model. In light of the strong correlation between cloze probability and surprisal (Study 1.1), we visualize the surprisal estimate for each completion across layers with separate bins for continuations that vary in their human cloze probability, such that some completions belong to strongly constraining con-texts, and others less so (Figure 3). As shown in Figure 3, starting from the very first layer and across all three models, high-probability cloze completions are typically assigned the highest probabilities and the lowest-probability completions are assigned the lowest probabilities. However, we can see that the models start to signifi-cantly diverge when qualitatively examining the trajectory of probabilities 10 Figure 3: Next-word probabilities through the logit lens across layers and models. 

11 that can be assigned to human responses across layers. Interestingly, both GPT-2 and RoBERTa exhibit a sharp change in the strength of known next words between the penultimate layer and the last hidden state, which is most tuned to the language modeling head, which produces the logit values by transforming the model’s encoded representation of the context into a distri-bution over next-token probabilities (Rogers et al., 2020; Tenney et al., 2019). By contrast, Pythia shows a more gradual change from layer to layer, with each response gradually increasing in probability across layers. This is most likely due to the geometry of Pythia embeddings more generally (Machina and Mercer, 2024; Lee et al., 2025). These results are also consistent with previous findings arguing that the language modeling objective changes hid-den states most in intermediate layers because different linguistic structural interactions have been computed by the system (Rogers et al., 2020; Tenney et al., 2019). 

2.5. Discussion 

In Experiment 1, we showed that even though different models can corre-late to similar degrees with human data, there are crucial differences between human and models and between models and models. The divergence in the trajectory of probabilities observed in this exper-iment is in line with the fact that different LLMs are known to encode dif-ferent linguistic properties to different extents across the distinct layers of hidden states (Tenney et al., 2019). Thus, far from producing theoretically-equivalent surprisal estimates, different LLMs imply distinct computational and algorithmic commitments. While this may appear obvious, there are clear theoretical consequences for cognitive modelers. In particular, the mod-els represent different information in their own computation of surprisal de-pending on whether they encode context bidirectionally or serially (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019). This in turn instantiates different choices about the nature of the information leveraged in the computation of surprisal. Additionally, other architectural decisions for the different models similarly constrain the computations that are able to be made (Machina and Mercer, 2024), how information flows across layers, and the downstream surprisal estimates that result. Additionally, the results of Experiment 1 demonstrate that the specific implementations of the computation of next-word probabilities are clearly highly diverse within computational and human systems. In this sense, merely focusing on the magnitude of the correlation between humans and 12 language models can be misleading for cognitive modelers. While some lan-guage model behaviors correlate better than others with human responses in the cloze task, the lack of an exact reason for any correspondence between the two should raise concerns. To take one example, the next-word predic-tion models (GPT-2 and Pythia) both correlate with cloze probabilities more strongly than the masked language model (RoBERTa). One could argue on the basis of predictive powers (e.g., ΔLL or 𝑅 2) that this is evidence that next-word prediction is a better model of sentence comprehension in humans and machines (Michaelov et al., 2024). Indeed, many computational psy-cholinguists have largely moved on from using masked language models in favor of next-word prediction systems. However, the theoretical backing for these decisions has largely not been provided, and instead models are adopted to the extent that they produce the greatest improvements in accounting for variation in reading times. Any number of decisions that shaped the devel-opment of GPT-2 or Pythia or RoBERTa – from data to model architecture – could explain why a model is better at matching human performance on empirical grounds. Even models of different sizes may vary in their capacity to match human language processing (Oh and Schuler, 2023) but the causal reasons for these patterns are difficult to infer. Regardless, greater PP does not necessarily justify a model’s use, especially when the computations are known to differ in important ways (Cummins, 2000). 

3. Experiment 2: Lexicality of inner computations of large lan-guage models 

In Experiment 2, we present another means to assess the behavior of these three models. We demonstrate that each model represents a different linking hypothesis about how next-word predictions are computed. Of par-ticular interest is the representational content of the hidden states within the language models, particularly how much the states encode the model’s beliefs about future states as words , as opposed to other linguistic objects (e.g., semantic or syntactic categories or abstractions; Jacobs and Grobol, 2025). Such an analysis is possible because layerwise transformations all work toward the eventual goal of producing a vector of lexical activations, and Transformer architectures propagate different transformations of lower layers up the network (Barenholtz, 2026; Domenichelli et al., 2026). 13 3.1. Data 

We probe the process of composition in each model by analyzing the ten top-ranked responses after applying the “lexical lens”. The lexical lens al-lows us to examine model outputs directly, in a human-interpretable way, by analyzing the top (sub)words for each logit lens. In this experiment, we de-ploy the Provo Corpus, which contains 2398 sentence preambles taken from naturalistic web data sources. It contains just over 41 000 unique preamble-cloze response pairs (Luke and Christianson, 2016, 2018). The Provo Corpus is widely cited in computational psycholinguistic analyses and has been in-strumental in arguments illustrating the existence of a correlation between language model surprisal and reading times (Shain et al., 2024, a.o.). 

3.2. Method 

To summarize the output of each model’s predictions, we propose a met-ric that estimates the “wordlikeness” of a language model’s top predictions, which we call lexicality . Formally, lexicality is computed as the proportion of the top 𝑘 next-word guesses by the language models that correspond to lex-ical items in some lexicon (here, SUBTLEXUS; Brysbaert and New, 2009). To the extent that Pythia, GPT-2, and RoBERTa are computing dissimilar representations from each other, such dissimilarities may be evident in the lexicality of word guesses across each layer of the model. For illustration, we present a representative lexicality output from the three models under consideration in Table 2. A visual inspection of the average lexicality across all preambles, for each layer and model, suggests that different layers reveal increasingly contextual, linguistically-interpretable predictions, consistent with early Transformer in-terpretability analyses (Tenney et al., 2019), but with major layerwise dif-ferences across models (Figure 4). Focusing on the shapes of these curves, we see massive fluctuations in lexicality across layers and strikingly different patterns between models. Pythia begins with very low degrees of lexical-ity that rapidly rises to high levels, where it plateaus around layer 10 of 13. We believe that this is a consequence of differences between the embed-ding and unembedding matrices (as discussed in Section 2.2). These results also help to explain the very low probabilities assigned to particular tokens; strings that are interpretable as words (i.e., human predictions) are simply not available to Pythia at early stages. By contrast, RoBERTa shows a dis-tinct cup-shaped pattern, beginning at high degrees of lexicality that slowly 14 Table 2: Top 10 LLM completions of Luke and Christianson’s (2016; 2018) sentence frag-ment “When early Europeans discovered Easter Island, its somewhat isolated ecosystem was suffering from the effects of ___”, across models. For the sake of brevity, we only include an illustrative sample of layers. 

Pythia RoBERTa GPT-2 

2 13 8 13 1 9}}})$ the . deforestation the the \”}**). a fragmentation pollution a acourse climate . erosion \” an }}}(\\ an growth drought , \” }}}{\\ disease </s> disease ' this }}}({\\ its contamination isolation an ,\”}](# cold colonialism flooding in its ^](# over events man - their ))**(- global development hurricanes this in }}}_{\\ starvation depression humans all morph by the middle layers (6 to 8) into delexicalized subwords. An in-spection of RoBERTa’s top predictions in these interim layers reveals rare character sequences or sequences of punctuation symbols. GPT-2 shows yet a third pattern, such that it maintains a relatively high degree of lexicality throughout, rising somewhat between the first and antepenultimate layer, before dropping at the layer before the last and rising sharply at the output layer. In conjunction with Table 2, we can see that pre-final layers of GPT-2 most strongly “encode” highly frequent individual words. At the last layer, GPT-2 rises to Pythia’s levels of lexicality to predict more word-like tokens that linguistically resemble Pythia’s. 

3.3. Discussion 

Experiment 2 further builds on the findings of Experiment 1, and demon-strates that the internal computations of Pythia, GPT-2, and RoBERTa possess vastly different geometries and linguistic trajectories. A lexical lens functions in a human-interpretable way to provide complementary evidence to Experiment 1, which showed that the production of probabilities of po-tential continuations changes in starkly different ways across layers. Ex-15 Figure 4: Layerwise lexicality changes for 𝑘 = 10 over the 2398 preambles of the Provo Corpus (Luke & Christianson, 2016, 2018). 

16 periment 2 shows that when not considering human responses, but rather even the models’ own top-ranked guesses, the way that the model arrives at these guesses similarly is the result of vastly different computations. While these results are not particularly surprising, as the engineering advantages of different types of language models for different types of tasks has been well-established, the results underscore the challenge in applying LLMs as a tool to test Surprisal Theory, as the models are plainly not interchangeable in the way that they arrive at their predictions. We turn to these issues in the General Discussion. 

4. General Discussion 

A growing literature has suggested that at least under some circum-stances, readers engage in linguistic prediction at the level of specific phono-logical forms, individual words, and higher-order structures such as syntax (Haeuser and Borovsky, 2024; Luke and Christianson, 2016; Willems et al., 2016). Theories that argue that language processing essentially consists of predicting upcoming linguistic content have drawn analogies between the ob-jectives that language models are designed to solve (e.g., next-token predic-tion) and the process of anticipating potential next words or structures. As such, correlations between these two processes have been taken as evidence for Surprisal Theory (Michaelov et al., 2024; Shain et al., 2024). Our experiments illustrate how even though the surprisal values com-puted by different LLMs can appear superficially similar, they encode dif-ferent types of information and are computed by each model in strikingly distinct ways. The logit lens revealed that the probabilities of likely next words fluctuate wildly across different layers of different models. The lexical lens provides transparency about the very different patterns for the three models as they generate their predictions. We observed that model behavior varies across architectures and training objectives. These results underscore how the generation of a distribution of predictions can arise by processes unique to different model architectures and training objectives. On the basis of a correlation to human cloze probabilities, we might conclude that Pythia is the most human-like of the models we analyzed, but it is clear that the way it arrives at its predictions is distinct from RoBERTa and GPT-2. Thus, it is critical to evaluate the particular commitments made by each model about the relationship between input and output, which shapes the computations performed by the system. If different LLMs change the linking hypothesis 17 between probabilities and effort, then we are obfuscating what once made Surprisal Theory an informative hypothesis to psycholinguists. Researchers using LLM-derived surprisal thus end up accidentally operationalizing Sur-prisal using different underlying mechanics. We want to now cast a critical lens on how the wide-spread use of LLM probabilities in computational psycholinguistics has influenced theories of human language processing. In the remainder of this paper, we discuss what we believe are critical issues with the use and interpretation of LLM-based surprisal in modern psycholinguistics. We ask whether our understanding of Surprisal Theory as a computational-level account of language processing has improved in light of the ever-growing number of works that correlate surprisal with psychometric indices of cognitive processing difficulty. We then examine the extent to which we can claim that using LLMs is “representation-agnostic” to providing evidence for or against Surprisal Theory (Futrell et al., 2020). Have these findings improved our theories of linguistic cognition in general? In other words we ask: “ What kind of theory does surprisal – the measure – encode, and what is it meant to evaluate? ”

4.1. Claim: surprisal is not a computational-level proxy 

To better understand the issue we are trying to raise here, let us ask what exactly it means for something like Surprisal Theory to be interpreted as a computational-level theory in Marr’s sense. Marr’s approach has served as a valuable guide for theorizing within the cognitive sciences, since it offers a way to conceptualize the same object (e.g., a cognitive system or capacity) at different degrees of abstraction. 3

Traditionally, theories at Marr’s Computational level are meant to char-acterize the goal of the computations performed by a system, why it is ap-propriate for the system under study, and what the logic of the strategy for carrying out such computation is Marr (1982). Marr’s levels call for researchers to be explicit about the formal commitments and demands of their theories (Guest and Martin, 2021), and thus offer a good framework for leveraging computational modeling work in theory building. For this perspective to be insightful for cognitive theories, computational-level linking hypotheses should by definition provide transparent, interpretable 

> 3Though we should be wary of committing too strongly to a strict separation between these levels (Griffiths et al., 2015; Poggio, 2012; Pylyshyn, 1984; Embick and Poeppel, 2015).

18 connections between observable measures of behavior and hypotheses about the unobservable mechanisms of the underlying system (Spivey, 2025; Tanen-haus, 2004). That is, a computational-level perspective should allow re-searchers to understand the function that is computed by the system enough to be able to discern its fundamental properties, and how they abstract from its many possible algorithmic realizations. Surprisal Theory is therefore an abstraction that characterizes the nature of a relationship, but does not need to be implemented by a particular system. However, researchers who extract surprisal values from particular mod-els on the basis of their fit to human behavioral data, or because they are perceived as generating the most humanlike language, have selected a partic-ular algorithmic implementation. Understanding the content encoded by the computational transformations that take place between the input and output of language models should be a minimum prerequisite for deciding whether a particular system can be used even as a computational-level characterization of language processing. Given that LLMs are essentially black boxes (see Berkeley, 2019, for a clear-eyed review), their use inhibits researchers’ ability to identify such abilities. In this sense, even if truly representation-agnostic estimates of surprisal were possible, it is not clear why they would be de-sirable from an epistemological perspective: simply estimating a quantity without committing to hypotheses about the nature and structure of what is being computed is of very little usefulness for both theory crafting and validation. LLM-derived surprisal is therefore difficult to integrate into a computational-level description. 

4.2. Claim: LLM surprisal Lacks Cognitive Commitments 

At the time it was first introduced, Surprisal Theory was a captivat-ing theoretical advance that combined the strengths of probabilistic con-straint satisfaction approaches (Seidenberg and MacDonald, 1999) with sym-bolic reasoning over syntactic categories or structures (Boston et al., 2008; Demberg and Keller, 2008; Frazier and Rayner, 1982; Frazier, 1985; Jelinek and Lafferty, 1991; Kaplan, 1971; Rauzy and Blache, 2012; Yngve, 1960). In line with Marr’s original formulation, Hale (2016) explicitly calls for a computational-level theory of sentence processing as a high-level description of what a system is doing, assuming that “Surprisal […] specif[ie]s what the difficulty level of parsing a word should be in terms of structures defined in a language model.” Hale acknowledges that the next fundamental step in building explanatory linking hypotheses is to then provide a plausible model 19 of the underlying process, in terms of compatible mechanisms (e.g., chunk-ing). The dual commitments to the characterization of (1) representations and (2) mechanisms underlying language processing are conspicuously absent in some recent research. Consider, for example, works focusing on the shape of the correlation between surprisal and comprehension difficulty. Whereas Hale (2001) proposed that a word’s surprisal should be monotonically related to processing difficulty, Smith and Levy (2013) claimed that the relation-ship should be log-linear in nature. Recent analyses using massive language models have corroborated these earlier claims, whose evidence relied on cor-relations between reading times and non-neural statistical language models (Shain et al., 2024; Smith and Levy, 2013). However, others have argued that a word’s predictability is linearly correlated with its processing diffi-culty (Brothers and Kuperberg, 2021). As a compromise position, Szewczyk and Federmeier (2022) argued that a combination of linear and log-linear components is necessary to account for the full pattern of neurobehavioral data. In the conduct of these studies, many researchers have tested hundreds of varieties of language models that possess different architectures and training objectives, to hopefully identify linear, log-linear, or other types of relation-ships between human data and LLM estimates of next word probabilities (Oh and Schuler, 2024; Shain et al., 2024; Timkey et al., 2025). Researchers in this area offer minimal hypotheses about the merits of different models or rep-resentations from a cognitive point-of-view. That is, the level of description at which surprisal is formulated in recent work falls short of the specificity that Marr called for in characterizing the properties of the function that is being computed, as well as of the insights original work on Surprisal Theory claimed we could get from pursuing this research enterprise. 

4.3. Claim: LLM surprisal is not a monolithic construct 

Another challenge with this approach is the generality of the assumed im-portance of language model probabilities for many aspects of human language processing. Commonly, researchers argue for the importance or reflection of surprisal on human cognition based on improved correlations in regression models of psychophysical data. In particular, researchers seem to treat dif-ferent DVs as effectively interchangeable and broadly reflective of the same cognitive process (e.g., probabilistic pre-activation of some upcoming linguis-tic category; Campanelli et al., 2018; Li and Futrell, 2023; Shain et al., 2024). 20 For example, many studies have compared and contrasted a surprisal-based N400 response to a similar relationship between surprisal and reading times, though these two measures are very likely generated by different cognitive mechanisms (Frank et al., 2013; Michaelov et al., 2024; a.o.). While a tendency to use psychometrics as interchangeable proxies for cog-nitive processes is common in psycholinguistics, there has nonetheless been some care in distinguishing general indexes of “effort” (e.g., RTs, fixations, pupil dilation) to more refined indexes of mental operations sensitive to dif-ferent processes and levels of representations (Stanojević et al., 2023; Timkey et al., 2025; De Santo, 2025; a.o.) Work applying LLM-generated surprisal to human data as a blanket measure loses track of these distinctions. It confuses potential explanations of the link between surprisal and effort with more theoretically powerful explanations of the link between predictability as a property of language and the nature of predictive mechanisms. 

4.4. Claim: LLM surprisal Obfuscates Theoretical Questions 

Perhaps even more problematically, this focus on predictive power (PP) 

per se , as well as the practice of data-fitting and making theoretical conclu-sions on the basis predictive power, has been fundamentally diminishing the field’s ability to critically incorporate computational results into our broader theory-building enterprise. For example, analyses of PP have been used to argue that cloze probabilities like those we analyze above are poor estimates of human linguistic prediction, and that language model probabilities are more valid estimates of the type of linguistic knowledge that readers use. Researchers who have focused on selecting the best surprisal estimate for their analyses see coarser measurements of predictability relative to LLM logits as a shortcoming (Smith and Levy, 2011, 2013; Szewczyk and Feder-meier, 2022), since answers consist of one or a few discrete words (Taylor, 1953). This is despite the fact that cloze probabilities have long been used as a proxy for the predictability of words in texts (De Varda et al., 2023; Federmeier et al., 2007; Luke and Christianson, 2016), are a reliable predic-tor of reading times and neural signals (Szewczyk and Federmeier, 2022) and are generated from humans engaged in the processes our cognitive theories attempt to explain. Similarly, on the basis of PP, researchers have argued that predicting words in the cloze task does not engage the same prediction mechanisms that are thought to support efficient language processing (Smith and Levy, 2011), and that cloze probabilities should be abandoned as prox-ies for predictability. In the absence of a cognitive explanation, however, 21 differences in PP are not sufficient support for this argument. The focus on predictive power of surprisal has also obscured recent is-sues that surfaced with the Natural Stories Corpus (Futrell et al., 2018), an annotated self-paced reading (SPR) dataset that is incredibly popular in (computational) psycholinguistics research exploring LLM-generated sur-prisal correlation to human effort in reading (Shain et al., 2024; Oh and Schuler, 2023; a.o). As of this writing, the corpus has been cited in over 120 papers, according to Semantic Scholar. These issues derive from several fundamental errors in how the corpus was compiled, with SPR data in the original release misaligned by one position 4 The most visible consequence of recognizing this error in Natural Stories has been a recommendation to “rerun past analyses”. The implicit assumption here seems to be that as long as the results of our data-fitting processes are unchanged (e.g. based on statistical comparisons), then the error was inconsequential and we should not worry. However, given the success of previously-published surprisal measures on this corpus, and the (implicit and explicit) assumption that surprisal should cap-ture some measure of effort at the current word, such a misalignment error should have led researchers to reconsider why exactly their surprisal analyses had been so successful. In other words, if a researcher believed they were modeling processing effort at word 𝑤 𝑖 , but in reality they were modeling 

𝑤 𝑖+1 (or 𝑤 𝑖−1 ), what does that say about the theories of cognitive processes they have been building based on that correlation? At the very least, er-rors of this magnitude should force us to re-evaluate what we thought we understood about what a measure or model means. If we are interested in building informative theories of cognitive systems, and we think our compu-tational constructs should represent interpretable linking hypotheses between behavior and the cognitive processes under study, we should ask what we are actually learning from a metric that does not seem to be sensitive to such a core element of the process we are trying to understand (in this case, which 

word we are measuring effort at). 

4.5. Claim: LLM surprisal Obfuscates Representational Assumptions 

The problem is also evident when examining the objects that LLMs pre-dict in the first place. Subwords are nearly always the object of prediction 

> 4The official repository states: “Update 2025-05-12 We have discovered that the SPR data in the original release was misaligned by one position. […] If you have been using the dataset, we recommend re-running your analyses on the realigned data.”

22 in these models (Nair and Resnik, 2023; Oh et al., 2021; Oh and Schuler, 2024). That is, a model may not normally be predicting words at all, but rather character sequences that sometimes correspond to words. Oh and Schuler (2024) rightly point out that in experiments where the written forms of words are separated by spaces, human beings read words, and therefore advocate (on the basis of PP) for computing probabilities that are aware of word boundaries and character positions. While this advice is seemingly in-nocuous, incorporating word boundary information is a fundamental change to the computation of surprisal. Still others have argued that computing the probabilities of character sequences is more cognitively consistent with decades of research into visual word recognition (Apel et al., 2019; Vieira et al., 2025; Oh et al., 2021; Oh and Schuler, 2024). However, these methods are impractical to compute and difficult to incorporate into most analysis pipelines because computing the conditional probability of an entire charac-ter sequence is inefficient. More relevant for the cognitive modeler, these two “solutions” both repre-sent inductive biases about the nature of words, about the relevant linguistic levels at which readers are computing predictions, and yet the cognitive al-gorithm that ties surprisal to the allocation of attention is assumed to be unchanged. Arguing for representational changes on the basis of PP directly contradicts the proposal that surprisal is a tool to evaluate a computational level description of the same system, when the information involved in the characterization(s) of such system differs in several fundamental aspects (e.g., characters versus subwords versus words; Oh et al., 2021; Oh and Schuler, 2024). 

4.6. Claim: LLM surprisal Reduces Behavior to a Benchmark 

Relatedly, the recent pursuit of “better” LLMs for modeling different DVs (e.g., Oh and Linzen, 2026) has re-cast analyses of human behavior into a problem for which it is possible to achieve something like “state-of-the-art” performance. Under this approach, this reasoning states that better models will attain a closer fit to a DV on the basis of ΔLL or 𝑅 2, such that finding a significant contribution to model fit is seen as evidence of that variable’s im-portance to psycholinguistic processing. From this fitting-centric perspective, the way to improve large language models as a model of human cognition requires us to make them match human beings. For example, Oh and Linzen (2026) highlight that a major discrepancy between human and LLM pro-cessing lies in the greater memorization capacity of LLMs and that limiting 23 memory capabilities of language models is critical for improving fit to hu-man data (e.g., by applying lossy context surprisal; Futrell et al., 2020). Oh and Linzen (2026) argue that LLMs should be adjusted to be more human-like and to possess more limited memory representations. However, if the researcher alters the memories of the model to be susceptible to forgetting or illusions, this changes the model that computes surprisal itself, and this approach changes the algorithm in the first stage of the allocation of atten-tion. This call to match LLMs to humans is a reversal of the philosophical approach to modeling cognition from first principles and embodies the split between classical and modern connectionism described by Guest and Martin (2025). The conclusion that we should simply alter LLMs to behave in a more human-like way reveals the scientific dead-endedness of the current enter-prise. Many researchers in the field continue to chase variants of a statistical measure to continue maximizing predictive power, with little reflection on whether this ceiling has already been reached and whether it would yield useful information. That is, having developed estimates of language statis-tics that apparently go beyond what humans can track (and therefore result in decreasing predictive power for human behaviors), the conclusion is nei-ther that surprisal is only useful or predictive up to a point, nor that we need to reconsider the cognitive processes and constraints that would result in a “sub-optimally estimated” surprisal being the better predictor for human behavior. 

4.7. In Sum: surprisal is Not an Explanation 

In a sense then, treating LLM-surprisal as a good, generally valid imple-mentation of a vaguely specified version of “Surprisal Theory” gives us neither a good computational-level theory of predictive processes in language, nor an algorithmic-level theory detailed enough to ask cognitively relevant ques-tions about predictive mechanisms (Culbertson et al., 2026; Murphy et al., 2026; Resnik, 2026). In different terms, we end up without a good or useful computational-level account because the opaqueness of the models used to es-timate the surprisal “measure” prevents us from inferring anything about the aspects of the system that computational-level descriptions should help us understand (e.g., core properties of the function, restrictions on the domain of the function, the impact of representational choices, etc.). Furthermore, we end up lacking a good algorithmic-level account because most practition-ers in this line of work don’t manipulate the algorithmic details explicitly 24 enough to be informed by whether they matter or not for the generalizability of the theory. 

4.8. Where Do We Go From Here? 

In this work, we want to advance the perspective that the major goal of applying statistical language modeling (broadly construed) to psycholinguis-tics should not be to establish a correlation or even to test which measures best fit the behavioral data. Rather, any theory of sentence processing should provide an account of what knowledge we use when comprehending language (Embick and Poeppel, 2015; Guest and Martin, 2021; Slaats and Martin, 2025; Staub, 2025). We thus wish to offer suggestions on how to fruitfully investigate Surprisal Theory as an informative account of language processing. First, the multiple realizability problem ensures that surface-similar surprisal values will arise from many different types of language models. While multiple-realizability is intrinsic to computational-level theories, a computational-level account is informative as a characterization of a cognitive system only when it allows us to determine properties of the system that are independent of the algorithmic specification. As we argued above, this should make practitioners cautious of using surprisal metrics extracted from opaque models as interchangeable, and researchers serving as reviewers should refrain from uncritically requesting adding surprisal (from the latest LLM) as a covariate into analyses of psy-chophysical data. For similar reasons, psycholinguists should be careful in uncritically treating surprisal estimates from dozens or even hundreds of lan-guage models as alternative implementations of the same underlying linking hypothesis, and selecting “the best model” purely on the basis of predictive power. Instead, researchers should carefully consider how the numerous ways in which these models differ from each other impact the theoretical assump-tions about what surprisal is estimating (Oralova et al., 2025; Timkey et al., 2025). When extracting surprisal values from a language model, researchers should explicitly commit to which models/architectures they consider cogni-tively plausible (cf. Baggio et al., 2024) and which aspect of a model they believe is necessary to answer their research questions. Laying out one’s hypotheses about the cognitive abilities that allows us to process language successfully, how they are related to each other, and how they are specified by the models we use would improve our ability to test different representational and computational assumptions, and help build better theories. 25 Second, we encourage researchers to move beyond predictive power in justifying their modeling decisions, and to value cognitively motivated, ex-plainable models over “state-of-the-art” LLMs. In this paper we showed that even with effectively identical fits to human data, the computations that gen-erated surprisal values relied on vastly different representations. Even select-ing between encoder and decoder-type language models requires a theoretical justification describing how human language processing is expected to unfold. With greater engagement in these deep theoretical issues, it will be possible to bring Surprisal Theory closer to Hale’s (2016) proposal that researchers should lay out the precise representations and computations that drive peo-ple’s reading times or neural signals or eye movements change depending on the predictability of some linguistic content. We believe that Surprisal Theory can move beyond fitting behavioral data, and support researchers’ ability to identify the analogous components that enable a particular model to solve a cognitive problem. It is only through this commitment to explana-tory theory building that computational psycholinguistics will arrive at an understanding of human language processing. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to thank Grusha Prasad and the three anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback on previous versions on this manuscript. 

References 

Aaronson, D., Scarborough, H.S., 1976. Performance theories for sentence coding: Some quantitative evidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 2, 56–70. URL: https://doi.apa. org/doi/10.1037/0096-1523.2.1.56 , doi: 10.1037/0096-1523.2.1.56 .Apel, K., Henbest, V.S., Masterson, J., 2019. Orthographic knowledge: clar-ifications, challenges, and future directions. Reading and Writing 32, 873– 889. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11145-018-9895-9 ,doi: 10.1007/s11145-018-9895-9 .Baggio, G., De Santo, A., Nuñez, N.A., 2024. Plausibility and Early Theory in Linguistics and Cognitive Science. Computational Brain & Behavior 7, 535–547. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s42113-024-001 96-7 , doi: 10.1007/s42113-024-00196-7 .26 Barenholtz, E., 2026. Trajectory dynamics in language model hidden states predict human processing costs beyond surprisal. URL: https://arxiv. org/abs/2606.05346 , arXiv:2606.05346 .Bengio, Y., Ducharme, R., Vincent, P., Jauvin, C., 2003. A Neural Proba-bilistic Language Model . Berkeley, I.S.N., 2019. The Curious Case of Connectionism. Open Philosophy 2, 190–205. URL: https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515 /opphil-2019-0018/html , doi: 10.1515/opphil-2019-0018 .Biderman, S., Schoelkopf, H., Anthony, Q., Bradley, H., O’Brien, K., Hal-lahan, E., Khan, M.A., Purohit, S., Prashanth, U.S., Raff, E., Skowron, A., Sutawika, L., 2023. Pythia: A Suite for Analyzing Large Language Models Across Training and Scaling. International Conference on Machine Learning , 2397–2430. Bommasani, R., Hudson, D.A., Adeli, E., Altman, R., Arora, S., von Arx, S., Bernstein, M.S., Bohg, J., Bosselut, A., Brunskill, E., Brynjolfsson, E., Buch, S., Card, D., Castellon, R., Chatterji, N., Chen, A., Creel, K., Davis, J.Q., Demszky, D., Donahue, C., Doumbouya, M., Durmus, E., Ermon, S., Etchemendy, J., Ethayarajh, K., Fei-Fei, L., Finn, C., Gale, T., Gille-spie, L., Goel, K., Goodman, N., Grossman, S., Guha, N., Hashimoto, T., Henderson, P., Hewitt, J., Ho, D.E., Hong, J., Hsu, K., Huang, J., Icard, T., Jain, S., Jurafsky, D., Kalluri, P., Karamcheti, S., Keeling, G., Khani, F., Khattab, O., Koh, P.W., Krass, M., Krishna, R., Kuditipudi, R., Kumar, A., Ladhak, F., Lee, M., Lee, T., Leskovec, J., Levent, I., Li, X.L., Li, X., Ma, T., Malik, A., Manning, C.D., Mirchandani, S., Mitchell, E., Munyikwa, Z., Nair, S., Narayan, A., Narayanan, D., Newman, B., Nie, A., Niebles, J.C., Nilforoshan, H., Nyarko, J., Ogut, G., Orr, L., Papadimitriou, I., Park, J.S., Piech, C., Portelance, E., Potts, C., Raghu-nathan, A., Reich, R., Ren, H., Rong, F., Roohani, Y., Ruiz, C., Ryan, J., Ré, C., Sadigh, D., Sagawa, S., Santhanam, K., Shih, A., Srinivasan, K., Tamkin, A., Taori, R., Thomas, A.W., Tramèr, F., Wang, R.E., Wang, W., Wu, B., Wu, J., Wu, Y., Xie, S.M., Yasunaga, M., You, J., Zaharia, M., Zhang, M., Zhang, T., Zhang, X., Zhang, Y., Zheng, L., Zhou, K., Liang, P., 2022. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07258 , arXiv:2108.07258 .27 Boston, M.F., Hale, J., Kliegl, R., Patil, U., Vasishth, S., 2008. Parsing costs as predictors of reading difficulty: An evaluation using the Potsdam Sentence Corpus. Journal of Eye Movement Research 2. URL: https: //www.mdpi.com/1995-8692/2/1/2 , doi: 10.16910/jemr.2.1.1 .Brothers, T., Kuperberg, G.R., 2021. Word predictability effects are linear, not logarithmic: Implications for probabilistic models of sentence compre-hension. Journal of Memory and Language 116, 104174. URL: https: //linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0749596X20300887 ,doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2020.104174 .Brysbaert, M., New, B., 2009. Moving beyond Kučera and Francis: A critical evaluation of current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new and improved word frequency measure for American English. Behavior Research Methods 41, 977–990. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.3 758/BRM.41.4.977 , doi: 10.3758/BRM.41.4.977 .Campanelli, L., Dyke, J.V., Marton, K., 2018. The Modulatory Effect of Expectations on Memory Retrieval During Sentence Comprehension. Pub-lications and Research URL: https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_pu bs/440 .Culbertson, J., Kirby, S., Smith, K., 2026. Language models do not yet achieve explanatory adequacy because language is more than incremental prediction. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 49, e205. Cummins, R., 2000. “How does it work?” v. “What are the laws?” Two con-ceptions of psychological explanation., in: In F. Keil & R. Wilson (Eds.). Explanation and Cognition. MIT Press, pp. 117–145. Dar, G., Geva, M., Gupta, A., Berant, J., 2023. Analyzing Transformers in Embedding Space, in: Rogers, A., Boyd-Graber, J., Okazaki, N. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada. pp. 16124–16170. URL: https://aclantho logy.org/2023.acl-long.893 , doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.893 .De Santo, A., 2025. Capturing online src/orc effort with memory measures from a minimalist parser, in: Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics, pp. 24–35. 28 De Varda, A.G., Marelli, M., Amenta, S., 2023. Cloze probability, pre-dictability ratings, and computational estimates for 205 English sentences, aligned with existing EEG and reading time data. Behavior Research Methods 56, 5190–5213. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.3758/ s13428-023-02261-8 , doi: 10.3758/s13428-023-02261-8 .Demberg, V., Keller, F., 2008. Data from eye-tracking corpora as evidence for theories of syntactic processing complexity. Cognition 109, 193–210. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0010027708 001741 , doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2008.07.008 .Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K., 2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding, in: NAACL-HLT, pp. 4171–4186. Domenichelli, L., Brunato, D., Dell’Orletta, F., 2026. Linguistic profiling of transformer embedding geometry, in: Proceedings of the 30th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, pp. 145–164. Embick, D., Poeppel, D., 2015. Towards a computational(ist) neurobiology of language: correlational , integrated and explanatory neurolinguistics. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience 30, 357–366. URL: http://www. tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/23273798.2014.980750 , doi: 10.1 080/23273798.2014.980750 .Federmeier, K.D., Wlotko, E.W., De Ochoa-Dewald, E., Kutas, M., 2007. Multiple effects of sentential constraint on word processing. Brain Research 1146, 75–84. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/articl e/pii/S0006899306019986 , doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.06.101 .Fodor, J., 1974. Special Sciences (Or: The Disunity of Science as a Working Hypothesis). Synthese 28, 97–115. Frank, S.L., Otten, L.J., Galli, G., Vigliocco, G., 2013. Word surprisal pre-dicts N400 amplitude during reading, in: Schuetze, H., Fung, P., Poe-sio, M. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics, Sofia, Bulgaria. pp. 878–883. URL: 

https://aclanthology.org/P13-2152 .29 Frazier, L., 1985. Syntactic complexity, in: Zwicky, A.M., Dowty, D.R., Karttunen, L. (Eds.), Natural Language Parsing: Psychological, Com-putational, and Theoretical Perspectives. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Studies in Natural Language Processing, pp. 129–189. URL: 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/natural-language-par sing/syntactic-complexity/5718FDCF9D4B6710D692B29A2105E35F ,doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511597855.005 .Frazier, L., Rayner, K., 1982. Making and correcting errors during sentence comprehension: Eye movements in the analysis of structurally ambiguous sentences. Cognitive Psychology 14, 178–210. URL: https://linkingh ub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0010028582900081 , doi: 10.1016/0010 -0285(82)90008-1 .Futrell, R., Gibson, E., Levy, R.P., 2020. Lossy‐Context Surprisal: An Infor-mation‐Theoretic Model of Memory Effects in Sentence Processing. Cog-nitive Science 44, e12814. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/do i/10.1111/cogs.12814 , doi: 10.1111/cogs.12814 .Futrell, R., Gibson, E., Tily, H.J., Blank, I., Vishnevetsky, A., Piantadosi, S., Fedorenko, E., 2018. The Natural Stories Corpus, in: Calzolari, N., Choukri, K., Cieri, C., Declerck, T., Goggi, S., Hasida, K., Isahara, H., Maegaard, B., Mariani, J., Mazo, H., Moreno, A., Odijk, J., Piperidis, S., Tokunaga, T. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018), European Language Resources Association (ELRA), Miyazaki, Japan. URL: https://aclant hology.org/L18-1012/ .Futrell, R., Levy, R., 2017. Noisy-context surprisal as a human sentence processing cost model, in: Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the Eu-ropean Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Vol-ume 1, Long Papers, Association for Computational Linguistics, Valencia, Spain. pp. 688–698. URL: http://aclweb.org/anthology/E17-1065 ,doi: 10.18653/v1/E17-1065 .Goodkind, A., Bicknell, K., 2018. Predictive power of word surprisal for reading times is a linear function of language model quality, in: Sayeed, A., Jacobs, C., Linzen, T., van Schijndel, M. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics (CMCL 30 2018), Association for Computational Linguistics, Salt Lake City, Utah. pp. 10–18. URL: https://aclanthology.org/W18-0102 , doi: 10.18653 /v1/W18-0102 .Griffiths, T.L., Lieder, F., Goodman, N.D., 2015. Rational Use of Cogni-tive Resources: Levels of Analysis Between the Computational and the Algorithmic. Topics in Cognitive Science 7, 217–229. URL: https: //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/tops.12142 ,doi: 10.1111/tops.12142 .Guest, O., Martin, A.E., 2021. How Computational Modeling Can Force Theory Building in Psychological Science. Perspectives on Psychological Sciences . Guest, O., Martin, A.E., 2023. On Logical Inference over Brains, Behaviour, and Artificial Neural Networks. Computational Brain & Behavior 6, 213– 227. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s42113-022-00166 -x , doi: 10.1007/s42113-022-00166-x .Guest, O., Martin, A.E., 2025. A Metatheory of Classical and Modern Con-nectionism. Psychological Review URL: https://osf.io/eaf2z_v1 ,doi: 10.31234/osf.io/eaf2z .Haeuser, K.I., Borovsky, A., 2024. Predictive processing suppresses form-related words with overlapping onsets. Hale, J., 2001. A Probabilistic Earley Parser as a Psycholinguistic Model, in: Second Meeting of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics. URL: https://aclanthology.org/N01-102 1.Hale, J., 2016. Information‐theoretical Complexity Metrics. Language and Linguistics Compass 10, 397–412. URL: https://compass.onlinelibr ary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/lnc3.12196 , doi: 10.1111/lnc3.12196 .Hoover, J.L., Sonderegger, M., Piantadosi, S.T., O’Donnell, T.J., 2023. The Plausibility of Sampling as an Algorithmic Theory of Sentence Processing. Open Mind . Huang, K.J., Arehalli, S., Kugemoto, M., Muxica, C., Prasad, G., Dillon, B., Linzen, T., 2024. Large-scale benchmark yields no evidence that language 31 model surprisal explains syntactic disambiguation difficulty. Journal of Memory and Language 137, 104510. URL: https://linkinghub.elsev ier.com/retrieve/pii/S0749596X24000135 , doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2024 .104510 .Jacobs, C.L., Grobol, M., 2025. Towards a Bayesian hierarchical model of lexical processing, in: Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics. Jacobs, C.L., Hubbard, R., Federmeier, K.D., Grobol, L., 2025. Uncov-ering patterns of semantic predictability in sentence processing. Jour-nal of Memory and Language URL: https://osf.io/znkpg_v1 ,doi: 10.31234/osf.io/znkpg .Jacobs, C.L., McCarthy, A.D., 2020. The human unlikeness of neural language models in next-word prediction, in: Proceedings of the The Fourth Widening Natural Language Processing Workshop, Association for Computational Linguistics, Seattle, USA. pp. 115–115. URL: https: //www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.winlp-1.29 , doi: 10.18653/v 1/2020.winlp-1.29 .Jelinek, F., Lafferty, J.D., 1991. Computation of the Probability of Initial Substring Generation by Stochastic Context-Free Grammars. Association for Computational Linguistics 17. Kaplan, R.M., 1971. Augmented Transition Networks of Sentence Compre-hension. Language Research Reports 4, 1–42. Kieras, D.E., Just, M.A., 1984. New methods in reading comprehension research. L. Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, N.J. OCLC: 10348819. Kuribayashi, T., Oseki, Y., Ito, T., Yoshida, R., Asahara, M., Inui, K., 2021. Lower Perplexity is Not Always Human-Like, in: Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online. pp. 5203–5217. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.405 ,doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.405 .Lee, J.H., Jiralerspong, T., Yu, L., Bengio, Y., Cheng, E., 2025. Geomet-ric Signatures of Compositionality Across a Language Model’s Lifetime. Association for Computational Linguistics . 32 Levy, R., 2008. Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition 106, 1126–1177. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ abs/pii/S0010027707001436 , doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2007.05.006 .Li, J., Futrell, R., 2023. A decomposition of surprisal tracks the N400 and P600 brain potentials, in: Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. URL: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/A-decomposition-o f-surprisal-tracks-the-N400-and-Li-Futrell/73068323e124ebd47 ba82df26c7542e5b62bb895 .Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., Stoyanov, V., 2019. RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692 ,doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1907.11692 . arXiv:1907.11692 [cs]. Luke, S.G., Christianson, K., 2016. Limits on lexical prediction during read-ing. Cognitive Psychology 88, 22–60. URL: https://linkinghub.elsev ier.com/retrieve/pii/S0010028516301384 , doi: 10.1016/j.cogpsych .2016.06.002 .Luke, S.G., Christianson, K., 2018. The Provo Corpus: A large eye-tracking corpus with predictability norms. Behavior Research Methods 50, 826– 833. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.3758/s13428-017-0908-4 ,doi: 10.3758/s13428-017-0908-4 .Machina, A., Mercer, R., 2024. Anisotropy is Not Inherent to Transform-ers, in: Duh, K., Gomez, H., Bethard, S. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Mexico City, Mexico. pp. 4892–4907. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.274 ,doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.274 .Marr, D.l.P.O.P.A.T.M., 1982. Vision - a computational investigation into the human representation and pr. MIT Press Ltd. OCLC: 1023113044. Michaelov, J.A., Bardolph, M.D., Van Petten, C.K., Bergen, B.K., Coulson, S., 2024. Strong Prediction: Language Model Surprisal Explains Multiple N400 Effects. Neurobiology of Language 5, 107–135. URL: https://dire 

33 ct.mit.edu/nol/article/5/1/107/115605/Strong-Prediction-Langu age-Model-Surprisal , doi: 10.1162/nol_a_00105 .Murphy, E., Morosi, P., Leivada, E., Nevins, A., 2026. Machine yearning: Llms do not capture formal linguistic structure and obscure neuroscientific inquiry. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 49, e217. Nair, S., Resnik, P., 2023. Words, Subwords, and Morphemes: What Really Matters in the Surprisal-Reading Time Relationship?, in: Bouamor, H., Pino, J., Bali, K. (Eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, Association for Computational Linguistics, Sin-gapore. pp. 11251–11260. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2023.find ings-emnlp.752 , doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.752 .Oh, B.D., Clark, C., Schuler, W., 2021. Surprisal Estimators for Hu-man Reading Times Need Character Models, in: Zong, C., Xia, F., Li, W., Navigli, R. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th Interna-tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online. pp. 3746– 3757. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl- long.290 ,doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.290 .Oh, B.D., Linzen, T., 2026. To model human linguistic prediction, make llms less superhuman. Trends in Cognitive Sciences URL: https://ww w.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364661326001270 ,doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2026.05.008 .Oh, B.D., Schuler, W., 2023. Why does surprisal from larger transformer-based language models provide a poorer fit to human reading times? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 11, 336– 350. URL: https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00548 , doi: 10.1162/ta cl_a_00548 .Oh, B.D., Schuler, W., 2024. Leading Whitespaces of Language Models’ Subword Vocabulary Pose a Confound for Calculating Word Probabilities, in: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational Linguistics, Miami, Florida, USA. pp. 3464–3472. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2024. emnlp-main.202 , doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.202 .34 Oralova, G., Chen, L., Clark, S., Teodorescu, D., Helfrich, M., Fyshe, A., Demmans Epp, C., Perfetti, C., 2025. Surprisal in reading: language mod-els predict the N400 for L2 readers. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience , 1–20URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/23273 798.2025.2585303 , doi: 10.1080/23273798.2025.2585303 .Peelle, J.E., Miller, R.L., Rogers, C.S., Spehar, B., Sommers, M.S., Van En-gen, K.J., 2020. Completion norms for 3085 English sentence contexts. Be-havior Research Methods 52, 1795–1799. URL: http://link.springer. com/10.3758/s13428-020-01351-1 , doi: 10.3758/s13428-020-01351-1 .Poggio, T., 2012. The Levels of Understanding framework, revised. Percep-tion 41, 1017–1023. doi: 10.1068/p7299 .Putnam, H., 1967. Psychological Predicates, in: Art, Mind, and Religion. University of Pittsburgh Press. Pylyshyn, Z.W., 1984. Computation and Cognition: Toward a Foundation for Cognitive Science. The MIT Press. URL: https://direct.mit.edu /books/monograph/4701/Computation-and-CognitionToward-a-Fou ndation-for , doi: 10.7551/mitpress/2004.001.0001 .Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., Sutskever, I., 2019. Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners . Rauzy, S., Blache, P., 2012. Robustness and processing difficulty mod-els. A pilot study for eye-tracking data on the French Treebank, in: Carl, M., Bhattacharyya, P., Choudhary, K.K. (Eds.), Proceedings of the First Workshop on Eye-tracking and Natural Language Processing, The COLING 2012 Organizing Committee, Mumbai, India. pp. 21–36. URL: 

https://aclanthology.org/W12-4903 .Resnik, P., 2026. Are language models models? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 49, e220. Rogers, A., 2021. Changing the World by Changing the Data, in: Proceed-ings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online. pp. 2182–2194. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2 021.acl-long.170 , doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.170 .35 Rogers, A., Kovaleva, O., Rumshisky, A., 2020. A Primer in BERTology: What We Know About How BERT Works. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 8, 842–866. URL: https://direct.mit.e du/tacl/article/96482 , doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00349 .van Rooij, I., Baggio, G., 2020. Theory Development Requires an Episte-mological Sea Change. Psychological Inquiry 31, 321–325. URL: https: //www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/1047840X.2020.1853477 ,doi: 10.1080/1047840X.2020.1853477 .van Rooij, I., Baggio, G., 2021. Theory Before the Test: How to Build High-Verisimilitude Explanatory Theories in Psychological Science. Perspectives on Psychological Science 16. Schuler, W., Yue, S., 2024. Evaluation of an Algorithmic‐Level Left‐Corner Parsing Account of Surprisal Effects. Cognitive Science 48, e13500. URL: 

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cogs.13500 , doi: 10 .1111/cogs.13500 .Seidenberg, M.S., MacDonald, M.C., 1999. A Probabilistic Constraints Ap-proach to Language Acquisition and Processing. Cognitive Science 23, 569–588. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1207/s155 16709cog2304_8 , doi: 10.1207/s15516709cog2304_8 .Shain, C., Meister, C., Pimentel, T., Cotterell, R., Levy, R., 2024. Large-scale evidence for logarithmic effects of word predictability on reading time. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 121, e2307876121. URL: 

https://pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2307876121 , doi: 10.1073/pnas .2307876121 .Shannon, C.E., 1948. A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell Sys-tem Technical Journal 27, 379–423. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.or g/document/6773024 , doi: 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb01338.x .Slaats, S., Martin, A.E., 2025. What’s Surprising About Surprisal. Compu-tational Brain & Behavior 8, 233–248. URL: https://link.springer. com/10.1007/s42113-025-00237-9 , doi: 10.1007/s42113-025-00237-9 .Smith, N.J., Levy, R., 2011. Cloze but no cigar: The complex relationship between cloze, corpus, and subjective probabilities in language processing, in: Cognitive Science Society. 36 Smith, N.J., Levy, R., 2013. The effect of word predictability on reading time is logarithmic. Cognition 128, 302–319. URL: https://linkinghub.els evier.com/retrieve/pii/S0010027713000413 , doi: 10.1016/j.cognit ion.2013.02.013 .Spivey, M.J., 2025. A linking hypothesis for eyetracking and mousetracking in the visual world paradigm. Brain Research 1851, 149477. URL: https: //linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0006899325000356 ,doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2025.149477 .Stanojević, M., Brennan, J.R., Dunagan, D., Steedman, M., Hale, J.T., 2023. Modeling Structure-Building in the Brain With CCG Parsing and Large Language Models. Cognitive Science 47, e13312. doi: 10.1111/cogs.133 12 .Staub, A., 2025. Predictability in Language Comprehension: Prospects and Problems for Surprisal. Annual Review of Linguistics 11, 17–34. URL: 

https://www.annualreviews.org/content/journals/10.1146/annur ev-linguistics-011724-121517 , doi: 10.1146/annurev-linguistics -011724-121517 .Szewczyk, J.M., Federmeier, K.D., 2022. Context-based facilitation of se-mantic access follows both logarithmic and linear functions of stimulus probability. Journal of Memory and Language 123, 104311. URL: https: //linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0749596X21000942 ,doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2021.104311 .Tanenhaus, M.K., 2004. On-Line Sentence Processing: Past, Present, and Future, in: The on-Line Study of Sentence Comprehension: Eyetracking, ERPs, and Beyond, pp. 375–401. Taylor, L., 1953. ”Cloze Procedure”: A New Tool For Measuring Readability. The Journalism Quarterly 30, 415–433. Tenney, I., Das, D., Pavlick, E., 2019. BERT Rediscovers the Classical NLP Pipeline, in: Korhonen, A., Traum, D., Màrquez, L. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy. pp. 4593–4601. URL: https://aclanthology.org/P19-1452 , doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1 452 .37 Timkey, W., Huang, K.J., Oh, B.D., Prasad, G., Arehalli, S., Linzen, T., Dillon, B., 2025. Eye movements reveal a dissociation between prediction and structural processing in language comprehension . Vieira, T., LeBrun, B., Giulianelli, M., Gastaldi, J.L., DuSell, B., Terilla, J., O’Donnell, T.J., Cotterell, R., 2025. From Language Models over Tokens to Language Models over Characters. Wilcox, E., Meister, C., Cotterell, R., Pimentel, T., 2023. Language Model Quality Correlates with Psychometric Predictive Power in Mul-tiple Languages, in: Bouamor, H., Pino, J., Bali, K. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing, Association for Computational Linguistics, Singapore. pp. 7503– 7511. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.466 ,doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.466 .Wilcox, E., Vani, P., Levy, R., 2021. A Targeted Assessment of Incremental Processing in Neural Language Models and Humans, in: Zong, C., Xia, F., Li, W., Navigli, R. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online. pp. 939–952. URL: 

https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.76 , doi: 10.18653/v1/20 21.acl-long.76 .Wilcox, E.G., Gauthier, J., Hu, J., Qian, P., Levy, R.P., 2020. On the Predictive Power of Neural Language Models for Human Real-Time Com-prehension Behavior. Willems, R.M., Frank, S.L., Nijhof, A.D., Hagoort, P., Van Den Bosch, A., 2016. Prediction During Natural Language Comprehension. Cerebral Cor-tex 26, 2506–2516. URL: https://academic.oup.com/cercor/articl e-lookup/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhv075 , doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhv075 .Yngve, V.H., 1960. A Model and an Hypothesis for Language Structure. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 104, 444–466. 38 Appendix A. 

Figure A.5: Demonstration of correlation between language model and human cloze probability in Peelle et al.’s (2020) completion norms for RoBERTa. Dark points represent cloze level-specific means; lighter points represent item-specific values. Solid line represents 

𝑦 = 𝑥 , indicating a perfect correlation. Model probabilities are faceted by layer (first vs. last). 

39 Figure A.6: Demonstration of correlation between language model and human cloze probability in Peelle et al.’s (2020) completion norms for Pythia-160M. Dark points rep-resent cloze level-specific means; lighter points represent item-specific values. Solid line represents 𝑦 = 𝑥 , indicating a perfect correlation. Model probabilities are faceted by layer (first vs. last). 

40