Title: Learning to read a second language establishes a parallel L2 representation alongside the native one in the VWFA

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 39

Markdown Content:
Learning to read a second language establishes a parallel L2 

representation alongside the native  one  in the VWFA 

Siyi Fan 1, Xiaoxia Feng 1*, Xi Yu 1, Minye Zhan 2, Manli Zhang 3, Guosheng Ding 1,

Xiangzhi  Meng 4* 

> 1

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG, McGovern 

Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, PR China 

> 2

Sorbonne Université, Inserm, CNRS, Paris Brain Institute, ICM, Hôpital de la 

PitiéSalpêtrière, Paris, France 

> 3

Department of Psychology, School of Humanities and Social Sciences,University of 

Science and Technology of China , 96 Jinzhai Rd, Hefei, Anhui, China 230026  

> 4

School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences and Beijing Key Laboratory of 

Behavior and Mental Health, Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (Ministry of 

Education), Peking University, Beijing, P.R.China, 100871 

*Correspondence should address to  xiaoxia.feng@bnu.edu.cn  and 

mengxzh@pku.edu.cn 

funding statement: 

This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 

(32400893, 32371141 , 32471100 ), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central 

Universities (2263100008,  310421120 ), and the Open Research Fund of the State Key 

Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning. 

conflict of interest disclosure :

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. 

data availability statement: 

The source data for all figures will be available on Neurovault  (https://neurovault.org/) 

upon acceptance of the paper. Raw data can be made available for academic research 

upon reasonable request to the corresponding author. 

ethics approval statement :

The study was approved by the local ethical committee  of University. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Abstract :

Learning to read a second language requires the brain to incorporate a new writing 

system into an already established native -language reading network, yet how this 

process reshapes the Visual Word Form Area (VWFA) remains poorly understood. 

Using fMRI with  a passive viewing paradigm, we systematically investigated how 

VWFA responses to Chinese (L1) and English (L2)  word s evolved across three groups 

of native Mandarin -speaking children at distinct stages of L2 literacy acquisition: L2 

pre -readers,  L2  beginning readers, and  L2  advanced readers.  We combined univariate 

activation analyses, representational similarity analysis, and supervised machine 

learning classification to investigate two theoretical accounts of VWFA reorganization :

the Overlay Model, which predicts stable L1  responses  as L2 responses emerge, and 

the  Competing  Model, which predicts competitive reallocation of neural resources from 

L1 to L2. We found that although the VWFA already exhibited robust selective 

responses to L1 words, L2 -word selectivity was absent in  L2  pre -readers but emerged 

robustly in beginning readers, with L1 -word  selectivity remaining stable throughout. 

Representational similarity analysis further revealed that  robust  L2 word 

representations within the VWFA emerged only after children began learning to read 

L2, while L1 word representations remained stable across all three groups. Finally, 

supervised machine learning analyses  successfully  discriminated among the three L2 

literacy groups  on the basis of L2  but not L1  activation patterns, indicating that VWFA 

responses to L2 alone were sufficient to capture  children ’s stages of L2 literacy 

acquisition, whereas responses to L1 were insensitive to L2 learning experience ,

providing no support for  the Competing Model ’s prediction of competitive neural 

reallocation away from L1 . Together, these findings support the Overlay Model, 

demonstrating that the VWFA incorporates a new writing system within its existing 

cortical resources without compromising L1 print processing .

Keywords : VWFA , pre -reader,  learning  to read , overlay model, competing  model 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

1 Introduction 

Learning to read is a cognitively demanding process that entails years of practice and 

formal instruction, marking a pivotal milestone in children ’s cognitive development. 

Despite growing interest in how learning to read reorganizes the human brain, fMRI 

studies in pediatric populations, particularly in pre -readers, remain scarce and have 

focused predominantly on the acquisition of a  single  native writing system  (Brem et al., 

2010; Chyl et al., 2018; Dębska et al., 2024; Dehaene -Lambertz et al., 2018; Yeatman 

et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2018) . Existing studies have  nevertheless  provided robust 

evidence that the Visual Word Form Area  (VWFA ) is  a hallmark of the literate brain , as 

it  gradually emerges and becomes increasingly specialized for print processing in both 

children  (Centanni et al., 2018; Feng et al., 2020; Kubota et al., 2019; Monzalvo et al., 

2012)  and previously  illiterate adults  (Hervais -Adelman et al., 2019) . Yet increasing 

numbers of children worldwide are becoming bilingual readers, most commonly as 

sequential bilinguals who acquire second -language  (L2 ) literacy after establishing an 

initial foundation in their native  language  (L1). Despite this reality, the neural basis of 

bilingual literacy acquisition remains poorly understood, particularly how a reading 

system already tuned to the native writing system incorporate s a second  writing system .

Prior research in adult bilinguals has examined how the VWFA processes two writing 

systems,  revealing  various  neural representation patterns across different scripts  (Bai 

et al., 2011; Baker et al., 2007; Nelson et al., 2009; Wong et al., 2009; Xu et al., 2017; 

Zhan et al., 2023) . Specifically , w hile some studies reported substantial spatial overlap 

in the VWFA for both scripts, as seen in Englis h–Hebrew, Chinese –Korean, and 

Chinese –English bilinguals  (Bai et al., 2011; Baker et al., 2007; Wong et al., 2009) ,

others employing multivariate pattern analyses or high -resolution 7T fMRI have 

unveiled script -specific internal representations and partially segregated cortical 

patches  (Xu et al., 2017; Zhan et al., 2023) . Crucially, because these findings were 

derived from fluent adult bilinguals, they merely reflect the stable end -state of years of 

reading experience. A more fundamental and still unresolved question, therefore, is 

how the cortical territory in the ventral  visual cortex, encompassing the VWFA, initially 

reorganizes when a child first begins to acquire a second writing system. 

In parallel, extensive research has investigated how word -selective responses emerge 

in the VWFA during native -script reading acquisition, motivat ing several  theoretical 

accounts  (Dehaene & Cohen, 2007; Dehaene -Lambertz et al., 2018; E. Kubota et al., 

2024) . The neuronal recycling hypothesis  (Dehaene & Cohen, 2007)  proposes that 

neural populations originally tuned to other visual categories are progressively co -

opted for orthographic processing, implying a competition between words and other 

visual representations. In support of this view, higher reading ability in i lliterate and 

literate adults  was  associated with a modest reduction in face responsivity in the left 

fusiform gyrus, accompanied by a corresponding rightward shift in the hemispheric 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

lateralization of face processing  (Dehaene et al., 2010) . Similarly, in 6 -year -old children 

with varying reading performance, the spatial extent of letter -selective regions  (VWFA) 

was negatively correlated with the extent of the left fusiform face area (FFA)  (Centanni 

et al., 2018) . This competitive account explains clinical patterns as well: individuals 

with dyslexia exhibit reduced word selectivity in the VWFA , which w as  driven by 

elevated responses to objects rather than weaker responses to words  (Kubota et al., 

2019) . Moreover, recent longitudinal studies have found that, over development, 

increases in word selectivity  were  directly linked to decreases in limb selectivity, rather 

than face or object selectivity  (Nordt et al., 2021, 2023) . These findings leave the 

competitive mechanism underlying VWFA development unclear .

However, some studies challenge this competitive account, reporting that the 

emergence of word -selective responses  was  not accompanied by suppression of other 

visual categories  (Dehaene -Lambertz et al., 2018; Feng et al., 2022; Hervais -Adelman 

et al., 2019) . In our previous work, we empirically investigated how the VWFA emerge d

during native -script reading acquisition through a cross -sectional design comprising 

three groups of children: 6 -year -old pre -readers, 6 -year -old beginning readers, and 9 -

year -old advanced readers  (Feng et al., 2022) . We found that word -selective 

responses in the VWFA were absent in pre -readers but emerged robustly in beginning 

readers of the same age, confirming that VWFA emergence is driven by reading 

experience rather than maturation or age. Critically, the emergen ce of word selectivity 

in the VWFA reflected increased activation to written words rather than decreased 

responses to other visual categories, arguing against the strict cortical encroachment 

posited by the original  neural  recycling hypothesis derived from adult illiterates 

(Dehaene et al., 2010) . This pattern of findings is consistent with the revised neuronal 

recycling account proposed by Dehaene -Lambertz et al.  (2018) , and is further 

supported by adult literacy evidence from Hervais -Adelman et al.  (2019) , suggesting 

that VWFA emergence may occur without necessarily eliminating pre -existing 

responses to other visual categories. 

Importantly, whether th e mechanisms underlying VWFA emergence extend to L2 

literacy acquisition in children who have already developed native -script selectivity in 

the VWFA remains an open question. While our prior work demonstrated that learning 

a native script does not encroach  upon the cortical territory of non -text categories like 

faces, it remains entirely unknown whether this non -competitive principle also holds 

within the orthographic domain. To characterize the nature of  this  cortical 

reorganization  induced by L2 literacy acquisition , we propose two  potential  theoretical 

accounts: the Overlay Model and the Competing Model. The Overlay Model posits that 

L2 literacy is acquired within the ventral  visual cortex  as a functional  “overlay, ” without 

imposing neural interference on L1 print processing.  The Competing Model, conversely, 

holds that L2 acquisition triggers competition that reallocates neural resources away 

from L1, thereby compromising its pre -existing print processing. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

In the current study, we asked three questions: (1) whether L2 literacy acquisition 

induces neurofunctional reorganization in the ventral visual cortex  which  encompass es 

the VWFA already selective for the native writing system; (2) if so, where L2 -selective 

responses emerge,  specifically  whether  they  are  spatially aligned with pre -existing L1 -

selective responses or instead exhibit a systematic spatial shift ; and (3) how they 

emerge, that is, whether L2 acquisition proceeds as a functional overlay leaving L1 

intact, or as a competitive process that disrupts pre -existing L1  representation , thereby 

adjudicating between the Overlay and Competing Models.  To address these questions, 

we focused on Chinese –English bilingual acquisition, as Chinese and English 

represent a maximally contrastive pairing of writing systems: Chinese is a

morphosyllabic  logographic script characterized by complex spatial configurations, 

whereas English employs an alphabetic system with relatively transparent grapheme -

to -phoneme correspondences. This structural distance makes Chinese –English an 

ideal case for probing the  neural mechanisms underlying bilingual literacy acquisition 

in the developing brain. 

We recruited native Mandarin -speaking children across three stages of English literacy 

development: L2 pre -readers, beginning readers, and advanced readers. The se  three 

groups were  age -matched  but differed  critically  in their English literacy experience, 

with the  L2 pre -reader group having received no or limited formal English literacy 

training,  providing a rare opportunity to isolate the contribution of L2 literacy experience 

from maturational factors.  As in our previously published fMRI studies of reading  (Feng 

et al., 2020, 2022) , all children performed the same passive viewing task with words, 

faces, and houses, with the sole task of detecting an occasional target star.  To address 

the above three  questions, we combined complementary univariate, multivariate, and 

machine -learning analyses.  In the  univariate  analyses,  we first examined category -

selective activation across and within each group at both the whole -brain level and the 

ROI level . For the latter, we employed a moving -window approach along the  lateral –

medial and posterior –anterior  gradients centered on the VWFA to clarify whether  L2 -

selective responses emerged spatially at the  same cortical territory  as L1 -selective 

responses . To ensure that group -level patterns reflected consistent individual profiles 

rather than averaging artifacts, we conducted individual -based voxel -wise analyses 

comparing the most responsive voxels for English and Chinese words within each child. 

Furthermore, multivariate pattern analysis was applied to test  how  stable L2 

representation s emerged and whether  their emergence was  accompanied  by 

disrupt ion of L1  representation s. Finally, w e utilized supervised machine learning 

classification to examine whether  neural  patterns  evoked  by L2 and L1 words  could 

predict L2 literacy stage at the individual level, and critically,  whether successful 

classification would be restricted to L2 -based neural patterns or would also extend to 

L1 -based neural patterns. Classification based on L1 patterns would indicate that  L1 

repres entations are being reshaped by L2 acquisition, as specifically predicted by the 

Competing Model.  Together, this design allowed us to characterize how L2 literacy 

experience shapes neural responses to a newly learned writing system and directly 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

test the  Overlay and Competing Models , thereby clarifying the neural mechanisms by 

which the developing brain accommodates a typologically distinct second writing 

system. 

2 Methods 

2.1 Participants 

The present study initially recruited 60 typically developing children, all of whom were 

native Chinese speakers and primary school students. Despite being of similar age, 

participants varied substantially in their L2 literacy experience and were therefore 

assigned to three groups: L2 pre -readers, L2 beginning readers, and L2 advanced 

readers. The observed differences in L2 reading performance among children of the 

same age can be  partly  attributed to the educational context in China, where English 

is formally introduced as a second language starting in the third grade. However, some 

children had exposure to English before formal schooling through interest -based 

activities or extracurricul ar tutoring, resulting in substantial individual differences in 

early English literacy . Two participants were  excluded from subsequent analyses 

because of excessive head motion during fMRI scanning.  The final sample thus 

comprised 58 children with high -quality fMRI images (mean age = 10.18 ± 1.04 years; 

27 females, 31 males), including 20 L2 pre -readers, 19 L2 beginning readers, and 19 

L2 advanced readers.  A sensitivity power analysis in G*Power 3.1 showed that the final 

sample size of 58 participants provided 80% power to detect medium -to -large group 

effects in a one -way ANOVA with three groups at  α = .05 (minimum detectable effect 

size:  f = .42,  ηp² ≈ .15).  None of the children in the current study had a history of 

neurological, psychiatric, or hearing impairments. Written informed consent was 

obtained from both children and their parents. This study received approval from the 

Research Ethics Committee  of  Beijing Normal University. 

Children ’s L2 reading performance was assessed using a battery of English  literacy 

tests, including a lab -developed spelling test  (Meng et al., 2016; You et al., 2011)  and 

the  Word Identification and Word Attack subtests from the Woodcock Reading Mastery 

Test (Woodcock, 1998). In the  Spelling test  (total score  = 40 ), children were required 

to write down  English letters/ words upon their auditory presentation  (Meng et al., 2016; 

You et al., 2011) . The Word Identification test  (total score  = 106 ) measures children’s 

ability to read isolated words aloud, while the Word Attack test  (total score  = 45 )

assesses the skill in applying phonics and structural analysis skills to  decode unfamiliar 

pseudo -words.  Additionally, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed based 

on these three tests to derive a composite score reflecting each child ’s L2 literacy 

proficiency. This composite score was subsequently entered as a predictor in the 

brain –behavior regression analyses. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The  L2  pre -reader group comprised 20 children (mean age = 9.84 ± 0.97 years; 6 

females, 14 males) . Their pre -reader status was determined based on a combination 

of three aspects of early English literacy: limited single -word reading ability  (assessed 

via  Word  Identification),  limited phonological lexical representation  (assessed via 

Spelling), and  a lack of grapheme -phoneme correspondence knowledge (assessed via 

Word  Attack).  Specifically,  children in the pre -reader group  showed low er  performance 

across  the  three English tests, with  raw  scores ranging from 9 to 18 on the  Word 

Identification  test , 1 to 8 on the  Spelling test, and 0 to 7 on the  Word  Attack test. 

Although some children in the pre -reader group achieved relatively higher scores on 

Word Identification, this performance may have resulted from incidental exposure or 

rote memorization. Their spelling and nonword decoding performance neverthel ess 

remained very limited, indicating that they had not yet developed stable orthographic 

representations  and  grapheme –phoneme correspondence knowledge.  Overall, this 

profile closely resembled that of the L1 pre -readers in our previous study, who read 

fewer than 15 words per minute  (Feng et al., 2022) .

In comparison, the beginning reader group consisted of 19 children (mean age = 10.19 

± 1.12 years; 11 females, 8 males) who were comparable in age to the pre -readers but 

demonstrated greater L2 literacy experience  with  higher performance across the 

above  three English tests (Table 1). Finally, the advanced reader group consisted of 

19 children (mean age = 10.51 ± 0.97 years; 10 females, 9 males)  who  were also 

comparable in age to the pre -readers and beginning readers but had substantially 

greater L2 literacy experience and proficiency  (Table 1) . This group served as a higher -

literacy comparison group for examining how increasing levels of L2 literacy 

experience and proficiency are associated with brain organization. 

Descriptive statistics for  English  Spelling,  Word Identification, and  Word  Attack are 

presented in Table 1, as these measures were used to characterize children’s L2 

literacy status.  The three groups also differed in English phonological awareness, an 

English -related measure that was not used for group classification ( F(2, 55)  = 18.01,  p

< .001, η² = .41).  Age did not differ significantly across groups ( p > .05). To evaluate 

whether group differences in L2 literacy were confounded by L1 literacy ability, Chinese 

character recognition was also assessed  and w as  found  to  differ across groups ( F(2, 

55)  = 9.41,  p < .001,  η² = .26),  with  only  pre -readers scoring lower than advanced 

readers.  To examine whether lower L2 literacy performance in pre -readers  was 

associated with individual differences in L1 literacy ability , we examined within -group 

correlations between Chinese character recognition and English literacy measures. 

These correlations were not significant in the L2 pre -readers or beginning readers 

(ps  > .05),  wh ereas  among advanced readers, Chinese character recognition was 

significantly correlated with both English  Spelling and English  Word  Identification 

(Supplementary Table S1 ). 

The children also completed several cognitive assessments: Raven’s Standard 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Progressive Matrices to measure nonverbal reasoning  (Zhang & Wang, 1989) , Digit 

Cancellation test  (Mirsky et al., 1991)  to assess sustained attention and rule out 

attention deficits, and a digit -based Rapid Automatized Naming task  (Pan et al., 2011) 

to measure rapid naming ability.  No significant group differences were found in Raven’s 

scores, digit cancellation, or digit RAN  performance ( ps  > .05; Table 1).                                                                              

> Table 1 Characteristics of the three groups (mean sand standard deviation s).
> L2 Pre -readers L2 Beginning readers L2 Advanced readers F (2, 55)
> Pre -vs.
> begin
> (p value)
> Begin vs.
> adv
> (p value)
> Pre -vs. adv
> (p value)
> N20 19 19
> Age/years 9.84 ±0.97 10.19 ±1.12 10.51 ±0.97 2.13 n.s. n.s. n.s.
> Sex 6F 14M 11F 8M 10F 9M
> English Spelling 3.75 ±2.34 13 .00 ±6.92 24.84 ±5.81
> English Word Identification 13.95 ±2.54 18.61 ±2.25 25.5 0±3.99
> English Word Attack 2.25 ±1.86 6.72 ±2.59 13.72 ±4.71
> English phonological awareness 16.70 ±3.54 19.11 ±2.99 22.56 ±2.31 18.01*** < .0 5< .01 < .001
> Chinese Character Recognition −0.04 ±0.66 0.37 ±0.68 0.81 ±0.48 9.41*** n.s. n.s. < .001
> Raven's Standard Progressive Matrices 73.00 ±13.80 79.47 ±15.63 81.05 ±16.38 1.53 n.s. n.s. n.s.
> Digit Cancellation 0.20 ±0.68 0.20 ±0.81 0.33 ±0.73 0.18 n.s. n.s. n.s.
> Rapid Automatized Naming (digit) 1.23 ±3.57 −0.52 ±2.33 −0.77 ±2.42 2.89 n.s. n.s. n.s.
> Note. F = female; M = male; n.s. = not significant. ** *p< .001.

2.2 Stimuli and task 

The stimuli and experimental paradigm were adapted from  our previous studies  (Feng 

et al., 2020, 2022) . During MRI scanning,  five  categories of visual stimuli (English 

words, Chinese  words , faces, houses  and  rotating checkerboard) were presented in a 

mini -block design. The stimulus set comprised 30 four -letter English words, 30 single -

character Chinese words, 30 non -famous Asian faces (frontal or slightly angled), and 

30 house  images . All stimuli were gray -scale, presented in black on a white 

background, with luminance and image size matched across conditions. 

All children completed two functional runs. Each run consisted of  nine  mini -blocks 

presented in randomized order: two blocks  each  of English words, Chinese words, 

faces, and houses, and one block of checkerboard. Each mini -block lasted 18 s and 

was followed by a 10.5 s fixation cross. In each block, 10 pairs of different images 

belonging to the same category (200 ms presentation for  the first picture/word, 200 ms 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

inter -stimulus  interva l, 500 ms  presentation for the second picture/word) were 

presented, separated by a 600 ms fixation period. In addition to the 10 image pairs, 

each block contained two target stars (1500 ms each) presented at random positions. 

Children were instructed to press a but ton with their right index finger whenever a star 

appeared. This task was designed to keep the children’s attention focused on the 

visual stimuli, but without any explicit  word -reading requirement. 

Before scanning, all participants completed a brief training session in a mock MRI 

scanner to familiarize them with the scanning environment, task procedure, and the 

requirement to minimize head movement. 

2.3 fMRI data acquisition 

All MRI data were collected on a Siemens Tim Trio 3T scanner at the Beijing Normal 

University ’s imaging center. Stimuli were presented using E -Prime 2.0, and children 

viewed them through a mirror mounted on the head coil while wearing MRI -compatible 

noise -attenuating earphones. Functional images were acquired using a  12-channel 

head coil  and a gradient -echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence with the following 

parameters: TR = 2400 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip angle =  81° , matrix = 64 ×64, voxel size 

= 3 ×3×3 mm ³, slice thickness =  3 mm, number of slices = 40 ( contiguous  ascending 

acquisition).  A T1 -weighted volume was also acquired with the following parameters: 

176 axial slices,  TR = 2300 ms, TE = 4.18 ms,  flip angle = 9°, matrix = 256 ×256. 

2.4 fMRI data preprocessing 

Preprocessing of the fMRI data was performed using DPABI  (Yan et al., 2016) . Images 

were corrected for slice timing and realigned to the first volume for head -motion 

correction.  Head motion was quantified using framewise displacement (FD). 

Participants were excluded if they exhibited excessive motion, defined as a mean FD > 

0.5 mm, more than 20% of volumes exceeding the 0.5 -mm FD threshold, or any 

absolute displacement greater tha n 3 mm.  For spatial normalization, each participant’s 

T1 -weighted image was co -registered to the mean functional image and segmented 

using unified segmentation; the resulting deformation parameters were then applied to 

the functional images to normalize them to MN I space.  Nuisance regressors 

(cerebrospinal fluid and the six head -motion parameters from rigid -body realignment) 

were removed, followed by linear detrending . Finally, normalized functional images 

were spatially smoothed with a 6 -mm FWHM Gaussian kernel.  For multivariate pattern 

analyses, including RSA and classification, unsmoothed normalized functional images 

were used to preserve fine -grained spatial patterns. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2.5 Statistical analyses 

2.5.1 Category -selective activations at the whole -brain level 

Functional data were analyzed using a general linear model (GLM) at the individual 

level. Each stimulus category (English words, Chinese words, faces, houses and 

checkerboard) was modeled across the two runs, resulting in five regressors of interest. 

Mini -blocks were modeled as boxcar functions with their actual durations and 

convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF). Six head -motion 

parameters from rigid -body realignment were included as nuisance regressors. 

Activations were examined using two complementary types of contrasts . First, 

category -selective contrasts were conducted to identify category -specific  responses 

by comparing each category against the mean response to the other visual categories :

(1) English words versus the mean of faces and houses, (2) Chinese words versus the 

mean of faces and houses , (3) faces versus the mean of English words, Chinese words, 

and houses , (4) houses versus the mean of English words, Chinese words,  and faces. 

Second, category -versus -fixation contrasts were performed to estimate the overall 

activation associated with each category by comparing each condition with fixation .

These contrasts were subsequently used to assess activation magnitude across 

categories. 

At the group level, functional activation maps for each category -selective contrast were 

examined in the entire sample (N = 58) and visualized within each of the three L2 

subgroups: pre -readers (N = 20), beginning readers (N = 19), and advanced readers 

(N  = 19). Whole -sample maps were thresholded at  p < .001 at the voxel level and  p

< .05 FWE -corrected at the cluster level. Given the smaller sample sizes and 

substantial inter -individual variability in neural activation within each subgroup, 

subgroup activation maps were presented for descriptive purposes using an 

uncorrected voxel -le vel threshold of  p < .001 to visualize activation patterns across 

different stages of L2 reading  development. 

To examine group differences across the three groups and the association between L2 

literacy proficiency and brain activation across the entire sample, two whole -brain 

voxel -wise analyses were conducted. First, a one -way ANOVA was performed with L2 

reading  group as the between -subjects factor and individual -level English -selective 

contrast maps as the dependent variable. Second, a whole -brain multiple regression 

analysis was conducted using the English -selective contrast maps as the dependent 

variable. The  predictor of interest was a PCA -derived English literacy composite score 

based on  Spelling,  Word  Identification, and  Word  Attack scores, with age and Chinese 

character recognition ability entered as covariates. Statistical maps were thresholded 

at p < .001 at the voxel level and  p < .05 FWE -corrected at the cluster level. Given the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

stringent nature of this correction, we additionally report an exploratory analysis at two 

liberal thresholds (voxel -level  p < .001 and  p < .005, uncorrected at the cluster level; 

see  Supplementary Fig . S1 ), which revealed  voxels  showing group differences and 

voxels associated with English literacy proficiency. 

Given  our  strong prior hypothesis regarding the role of the VWFA in reading acquisition, 

we next focused on the  left ventral occipitotemporal cortex  (vOTC) encompassing the 

VWFA to investigate: (1) where L2 -selective responses emerged,  specifically  whether 

they were spatially aligned with or systematically shifted from pre -existing L1 -selective 

responses ; and (2) how L2 -selective responses emerged , s pecifically  whether  their 

emergence  was accompanied by stable L1 responses or by disruption of L1 responses. 

2.5.2 Moving -window ROI analyses along the  lateral –medial  and  posterior –

anterior  axes centered on the VWFA 

To investigate the functional organization of the left  vOTC  and its preferential 

responses to different visual categories, with a focus on the spatial  relationship 

(dispersion  or alignment)  of responses to  L1 and L2  words, we performed gradient -

based ROI analyses across three groups.  For the  lateral to medial  gradient centered 

on the VWFA,  β estimates for each category relative to fixation  were extracted from 6 -

mm -radius spheres  centered at four  regularly spaced  locations  along the x -axis (x =  –

57,  –45,  –33,  –21) , with the y - and z -coordinates fixed at the classical VWFA location 

(y =  –57, z =  –12). The y - and z -coordinates were  determined according to previous 

studies on  illiterates  (Dehaene et al., 2010) , typically developing  children  (Feng et al., 

2020)  and adults  (Vogel et al., 2012) . For the  posterior  to  anterior  gradient centered 

on the VWFA,  β estimates for each category relative to fixation  were extracted from 6 -

mm -radius spheres  centered at five  regularly spaced  locations  along the  y-axis (y =  –

72,  –60,  –48,  –36,  –24) , with the  x- and z -coordinates fixed at the classical VWFA 

location ( x = –45 , z =  –12) . This axis was chosen given previous evidence of a 

functional gradient related to orthographic and linguistic processing along the 

posterior -anterior axis  (van  der Mark et al., 2011; Vinckier et al., 2007) .

For each ROI along the  lateral –medial  and  posterior –anterior  axes, the  β values for 

each visual category relative to fixation were plotted separately for each group . These 

activation -profile plots  aimed  to objectively illustrate the gradient of categorical 

responses  along these axes, with a primary focus on the relative spatial organization 

of Chinese and English word responses, especially between pre -readers and readers 

with L2 experience. Exploratory English –Chinese comparisons were conducted within 

each group at each ROI . To account for multiple ROI -wise comparisons, false 

discovery rate (FDR) correction was applied to the resulting  p values. 

To further quantify word -selective responses, we computed  separate  selectivity  indices 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(SI s) for English and Chinese  words within each ROI. This allowed us to statistically 

test whether L2 -word selectivity emerged within the same cortical territory as L1 in the 

vOTC , and whether L2 -word selectivity increased with L2 reading experience and 

approached the spatial profile of L1 -word selectivity . Using the same sets of  lateral –

medial  and  posterior –anterior  ROIs described above, word selectivity indices were 

computed as follows: 

𝑆𝐼 𝐸𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑖𝑠 ℎ = 𝛽 𝐸𝑛 −𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑  − 𝛽 𝑛𝑜𝑛 −𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑢𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐 

𝑆𝐼 𝐶 ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑒  = 𝛽 𝐶 ℎ−𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑  − 𝛽 𝑛𝑜𝑛 −𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑢𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐 

where  βEn -word  and  βCh-word  denote the extracted  β estimates for English and Chinese 

words  versus fixation , respectively, and  βnon -linguistic  represents the mean  β estimate for 

non -linguistic categories (faces versus fixation and houses versus fixation). A positive 

SI indicates a stronger response to  English or Chinese words  relative to non -linguistic 

categories, whereas a negative SI reflects greater  selectivity  to non -linguistic stimuli. 

One -way ANOVAs were then conducted for each ROI and script to examine group 

differences in word selectivity, followed by  LSD post hoc comparisons to assess 

pairwise differences between the three groups .

2.5.3  Individual -level analyses: Cross -run responses in the most responsive 

VWFA voxels 

The group -level and ROI -based analyses described above characterize spatially 

averaged responses to two scripts and other visual categories, which assume 

consistent functional localization across all children. However, less proficient readers 

may exhibit g reater anatomical variability in the spatial distribution of active brain 

regions, and such variability could obscure fine -grained functional differences within 

the VWFA even when overall activation is comparable. To test whether L2 responses 

emerged withi n the most responsive VWFA voxels without reducing pre -existing L1 

responses, we conducted an individual -level voxel selection analysis within the VWFA. 

For each participant, analyses were conducted within a 10 -mm -radius sphere centered 

on the canonical VWFA coordinates  (Vogel et al., 2012) . Following Jacoby and 

Fedorenko  (2018) , voxels were ranked separately according to their category -selective 

activation for English words relative to  the  mean of  faces and houses and for Chinese 

words relative to  the mean of  faces and houses . T he top 10% of voxels were  then 

selected for each contrast individually ( Fig. 3A ).  The 10 -mm -radius VWFA sphere 

contained 170 voxels, such that the top 10% selection comprised 17 voxels for each 

script.  We used a two -fold cross -run selection -extraction procedure.  In the first  fold, 

Run  1 was used to define the English and Chinese top -10% voxel sets, and 

independent beta estimates for English and Chinese words relative to fixation were 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

extracted from Run 2. In the  second  fold, Run 2  was  used for voxel selection and Run 

1 for beta extraction. For each participant and voxel set, the final  beta estimates for 

English and Chinese  words  were obtained by averaging the extracted values across 

the two folds. 

The primary analyses focused on two individually defined voxel sets: English top -10% 

voxels and Chinese top -10% voxels. For each voxel set, we conducted a 2 (Script: 

English, Chinese) × 3 (Group: L2 pre -readers, L2 beginning readers, L2 advanced 

readers) m ixed -design ANOVA, with Script as a within -subject factor and Group as a 

between -subject factor. The Script × Group interaction was used to assess whether 

the relative response profile for English and Chinese words differed across stages of 

L2 literacy acq uisition. To further characterize  stage -related differences in responses 

to each script , one -way ANOVAs were conducted for English and Chinese beta 

estimates across groups. Linear trend analyses were also performed using 

GroupCode, coded as 1, 2, and 3 for L2 pre -readers, beginning readers, and advanced 

readers, respectively. 

Under the Overlay Model, English responses were expected to increase with L2 

literacy experience, while Chinese responses were expected to remain stable. In 

contrast, the Competing Model predicted that increasing English responses would be 

accompanied by r educed Chinese responses, reflecting competitive reallocation within 

the VWFA. 

2.5.4  Representational similarity analysis (RSA)  in the VWFA 

Building on the preceding  univariate activation analyses , we next examined how  L2 

literacy acquisition shapes the representational structure of L1 and L2 words in the 

VWFA . Specifically, we conducted RSA to assess multivariate patterns of  L1 and L2 

word  representations  within the VWFA in each participant , and to  compare these 

patterns across the three groups. 

Given the mini -block design and the inclusion of a brief attention task (star detection) 

within each block, RSA was conducted on unsmoothed functional data, with block -level 

activation estimates computed by excluding star -related time periods to isolate 

st imulus -driven responses.  Within a  10 -mm -radius sphere centered on the classic 

VWFA coordinates,  β estimates for each  block  were extracted and used to construct a 

16 ×16  representational similarity matrix (4 conditions ×4 blocks ). Each cell of the 

matrix reflected the Pearson correlation between activation patterns across  block s. To 

reduce potential inflation of similarity estimates due to run -specific noise or temporal 

autocorrelation, only cross -run correlations were included in the analysis.  The same 

RSA procedure was repeated using 6 - and 8 -mm -rad ius  spheres centered on the same 

VWFA coordinates  to assess the robustness of the findings .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To characterize how L2 literacy experience shapes L2 word representations and their 

relationship  to  L1 word representations in the VWFA (overlay vs. competing), we 

examined three sets of comparisons. All correlation coefficients were Fisher z-

transformed prior to analysis. First, we  assessed whether the VWFA exhibited robust 

representations of each script  at each stage of L2 reading  acquisition . A r obust word 

representation  was operationally defined as greater  within -category similarity 

(English –English or Chinese –Chinese)  than  the mean similarity between that script 

and the non -linguistic categories  (English –faces  and  English –houses , or  Chinese –

faces  and  Chinese –houses) within each group. Second, we examined how within -

script similarity for English (English –English) and Chinese (Chinese –Chinese) each 

differed  across groups using separate one -way ANOVAs, to assess whether L2 word 

representations became increasingly robust while L1 word representations remained 

stable or declined. Third, we examined  the representational relationship between L1 

and L2 words  by comparing within -script similarities (English –English, Chinese –

Chinese) with cross -script similarity (English –Chinese). Within each group, paired -

sample t -tests were used to assess whether L1 and L2 converged toward a shared 

representational structure  or remained distinct at each reading stage. For comparisons 

of within -script versus script -non -linguistic similarity, FDR correction was applied 

across the three group -wise paired tests for each script. For comparisons among 

English –English, Chinese –Chinese, and English –Chinese similarity, FDR correction 

was applied across the three pairwise tests within each group. 

2.5.5 Supervised machine learning  classification  based on activation patterns in 

the VWFA 

Additionally, we applied supervised machine learning to  assess  whether VWFA 

activation patterns evoked by different stimulus categories , particularly  English words 

and Chinese words , could reliably differentiate participants with varying L2 literacy 

levels  (L2 pre -readers, beginning readers, and advanced readers ). For each 

participant, GLM -derived  β estimates for  each stimulus category (English words, 

Chinese words, faces, and houses)  relative to fixation  were extracted from a 6 -mm 

spherical ROI centered on the canonical VWFA coordinates. This relatively small ROI 

was selected to restrict the number of voxel features and thereby reduce the likelihood 

of overfitting. Voxe l-wise  β values from this ROI were obtained for each run, yielding a 

feature matrix of size (subjects  ×runs) ×voxels  for each stimulus category . Each 

sample was labeled according to the participant’s group ( L2 pre -readers, beginning 

readers, or advanced readers ) ( Fig.  5A). 

We  implemented a stratified group -based cross -validation procedure. Specifically, five -

fold StratifiedGroupKFold  cross -validation  was used to ensure that (i) samples from 

the same participant  were always assigned to the same fold  and  never split  between 

the  training and test sets, and (ii) class proportions were approximately balanced 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

across folds. Within each fold, feature standardization was performed using a

StandardScaler fitted  to  the training data and  subsequently  applied to the test data. 

Three classifiers  were trained on the training set and evaluated on the held -out test 

set : logistic regression, support vector machine (SVM with an RBF kernel), and random 

forest.  Classification accuracy was computed by pooling predictions for all held -out 

samples across the five folds.  Statistical significance was assessed using permutation 

testing with participant -level label shuffling.  In each permutation, group labels were 

shuffled across participants, and the same shuffled label was assigned to both runs 

from a given participant. This preserved the repeated -measures structure of the data. 

The full five -fold cross -validation procedure w as then repeated using the shuffled 

labels.  A total of 1,000 permutations were performed to generate a null distribution of 

classification accuracies.  The permutation -based  p value was calculated as  (𝑘  +

1)/(𝑁 𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑚  + 1), where  𝑘  was the number of permuted accuracies equal to or greater 

than the observed accuracy. 

2.5.6 Analyses of other spoken -language -related regions 

Given that reading experience is known to reshape not only the ventral visual pathway 

but also broader components of the distributed language network  (Dehaene et al., 

2010; Monzalvo & Dehaene -Lambertz, 2013) , we conducted additional analyses in 

several left -hemisphere  spoken -language -related  regions . Guided by an integrative 

review and prior meta -analyses of reading -related activation  (Houdé et al., 2010; A. 

Martin et al., 2015; Romanovska & Bonte, 2021; Walenski et al., 2019) , we defined 

four  6-mm -radius spherical  ROIs  across  the left frontal, parietal, and temporal cortices: 

the middle frontal gyrus (MFG),  intraparietal sulcus  (IPS), superior temporal gyrus 

(STG), and superior temporal sulcus (STS)  (Fig.  6A) .

First,  we performed univariate analyses within each ROI to examine activation 

magnitudes for each stimulus category  across stages of L2 literacy acquisition . For 

each participant, GLM -derived  β estimates were extracted for the four visual categories 

(English words, Chinese words, faces, houses)  versus fixation . One -way ANOVAs 

were conducted for each stimulus category to examine group differences  among  pre -,

beginning, and advanced readers. 

Second, we performed RSA within each spoken -language -related ROI following the 

same procedure used for the VWFA (Section 2.5. 4).  Block -level  β estimates were 

extracted from each ROI, and  cross -run  representational similarity matrices were 

constructed for each participant.  Focus ing  on L2 word representations in the broader 

language network , we  compared  z-transformed within -English similarity with (1) the 

similarity between English words and  non -linguistic  categories and (2) the similarity 

between English and Chinese words  within each ROI using paired -sample t -tests . FDR 

correction was applied  separately  within each ROI across the six planned comparisons, 

corresponding to two comparisons  in each of  the three reading groups.  These  analyses 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

tested the robustness of English -word representations  and their relationship to 

corresponding  Chinese -word representations. 

Finally, we applied supervised machine learning classification to evaluate whether 

English -word  activation  patterns  in these  spoken -language -related  regions could 

differentiate participants with varying L2 reading experience . Following the  procedure 

used for the VWFA (Section 2.5. 5), GLM -derived run -level  β estimates for English 

words were extracted from each ROI and used as input features.  The classifiers were 

trained and evaluated separately for each ROI using five -fold StratifiedGroupKFold 

cross -validation.  Classification accuracy was calculated by pooling predictions for all 

held -out samples across the five folds. Statistical significance was assessed using 

permutation testing with participant -level label shuffling. 

3 Result s

3.1 Category -selective activation at the w hole -brain  level 

To characterize category -selective activation profiles across the ventral visual cortex, 

we first examined responses across all children. The four categories showed a broadly 

medial -to -lateral organization within the vOTC: house -selective activation was bi lateral 

and centered in medial occipitotemporal cortex, spanning calcarine and lingual visual 

cortices as well as parahippocampal  cortex; face -selective activation was 

predominantly right -lateralized, occupying adjacent fusiform and occipitotemporal 

regions; and Chinese - and English -word -selective activations were primarily left -

lateralized ( Fig.  1A ).  Beyond the  left  ventral activations,  Chinese -word -selective 

activation extended to  the left frontal regions (precentral gyrus, middle frontal gyrus 

and supplementary motor area),  left superior  and middle temporal regions, as well as 

right superior temporal gyrus.  English -word -selective activation extended to  the left 

frontal regions (precentral gyrus, superior  and  inferior frontal gyrus), together with the 

inferior parietal lobule and inferior temporal gyrus ( Supplementary Table S 2). For 

non -linguistic  categories , face -selective activation extended into bilateral fusiform 

cortex, with additional right inferior occipital and lingual activation and medial temporal 

clusters involving the parahippocampal  regions. House -selective activation was 

extensive and bilateral across the  fusiform gyrus, middle occipital gyrus,  calcarine 

cortex , and parahippocampal cort ex .

We next examined activation patterns within each group ( Fig. 1B –D). As predicted, a 

preferential response to Chinese words in the left  vOTC was consistently observed 

across all three groups, indicating stable L1 -word selectivity regardless of L2 

experience. In contrast, activation to English words in the left  vOTC  showed different 

profiles across groups: pre -readers showed limited English -selective activation, 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

beginning readers showed English -selective voxels emerging in the vicinity of 

Chinese -selective regions, and advanced readers showed  substantial  spatial overlap 

between English - and Chinese -selective voxels.  Activation patterns for faces and 

houses remained largely consistent  across the three groups. 

We further conducted a one -way ANOVA and a whole -brain multiple regression 

analysis to investigate group differences and the association between L2 literacy 

proficiency and L2 -related activation, respectively. We first tested for these effects 

using a stri ngent whole -brain threshold ( p < .001 at the voxel level and  p < .05 FWE -

corrected at the cluster level), which yielded no significant clusters.  For exploratory 

visualization and hypothesis generation , we further inspected the data at a less 

stringent threshold ( p < .001 and  p < .005 at the voxel level, cluster -level uncorrected). 

This analysis identified substantially overlapping voxels in the left posterior 

occipitotemporal cortex, showing both a main effect of group in the ANOVA and an 

association with the English literacy c omposite score in the regression analysis 

(Supplementary Fig. S1 ).  Although these uncorrected findings should be interpreted 

cautiously, their spatial distribution was consistent with our prior focus on the vOTC 

encompassing the VWFA. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig.  1. Category -selective  activations.  Horizontal and sagittal sli ces showing category -selective 

activations across all participants  (A)  and separately for L2 pre -readers  (B) , L2 beginning readers  (C) , and 

L2 advanced readers  (D) . Violet: English word -selective  activations (English words > [Faces, Houses]); 

Green: Chinese word -selective  activations (Chinese words > [Faces, Houses]); Red: face -selective 

activations (Faces > [Chinese words, English words, Houses]); Yellow: house -selective  activations 

(Houses > [Chinese words, English words, Faces]). 

3.2 Moving -window ROI activations along the  lateral –medial  and 

posterior –anterior  axes centered on the VWFA 

To examine category -selective activation along the  lateral –medial  axis , with a focus on 

responses to English and Chinese words , we kept y =  –57 and z =  –12 constant and 

extracted activation for English words,  Chinese words,  faces and houses  along the x -

axis (ranging from  –57 to  –21;  Fig.  2A).  Along the  lateral –medial  axis, the activation 

profiles showed that  Chinese words elicited consistent peak activation at the canonical 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

VWFA coordinate  (Vogel et al., 2012) , x =  –45, across all three groups, indicating 

robust L1 -word responses regardless of L2 experience. In contrast, English -word 

responses at this coordinate were weak in L2 pre -readers but were comparable to 

Chinese -word responses in beginning and advanced  readers  (Fig.  2B). In  L2  pre -

readers, the English –Chinese difference at x =  –45  was nominally significant before 

correction  but did not survive FDR correction  (t = 2.67,  puncor  = .015,  pFDR  = .18 2). As 

L2 experience accumulated, both beginning and advanced readers exhibited 

comparable peak responses to English and Chinese words at x =  –45, suggesting that 

L2 -word responses emerged within the  same general VWFA territory and exhibited a 

spatial profile aligned with that of L1 responses , a pattern consistent with the Overlay 

Model.  The non -linguistic categories showed the expected topographic pattern, with 

faces and houses peaking at relatively  medial coordinates  across all three groups. 

Consistent with these descriptive patterns, word -selectivity analyses along the lateral –

medial axis further corroborated these findings: one -way ANOVAs revealed a

significant group effect for English -word selectivity at x =  –45 ( F(2, 5 5) = 3.28,  p < .05, 

η² = .11).  Post hoc comparisons indicated that  L2  pre -readers showed lower English -

word selectivity than both beginning and advanced readers  (Fig. 2C ). No group effect 

was observed for Chinese -word selectivity at any coordinate along this axis, and no 

other lateral –medial ROI showed group differences in English -word selectivity. 

Along the posterior –anterior axis (x =  –45, z =  –12; y =  –72 to  –24;  Fig. 2D ), the 

activation profiles showed that  L2  pre -readers exhibited nominally lower English than 

Chinese activation at y =  –72 ( t = 2.88,  puncor  = .0 10 , pFDR  = .14 4) and y =  –60 ( t = 2.65, 

puncor  = .01 6, pFDR  = .11 8), coordinates slightly posterior to the classic VWFA location 

(Fig. 2E ). In contrast, beginning and advanced readers showed comparable responses 

to English and Chinese words throughout this axis. 

Complementing these gradient plots, word -selectivity analyses along the posterior –

anterior axis  show ed a nominal group effect for English -word selectivity at y =  –72 ( F(2, 

55) = 3.39,  p < .05,  η² = .11).  Post hoc comparisons showed that  L2  pre -readers 

exhibited lower English -word selectivity than both beginning and advanced readers 

(Fig. 2 F).  Chinese -word selectivity showed a nominal group effect at y =  –36  (F(2, 5 5)

= 3.92,  p < .05,  η² = .12),  with higher Chinese -word selectivity in  L2  pre -readers than 

in advanced reader s. No other ROIs along the posterior -anterior axis exhibited 

significant group differences  in  either English - or Chinese -word selectivity. 

In summary, these results delineate  the spatial reorganization associated with L2 

literacy acquisition along  the lateral –medial and posterior –anterior axes within and 

around the VWFA . Notably, in  L2 beginning and advanced readers, activation profiles 

for Chinese and English words followed closely aligned spatial gradients along both 

axes, with peak responses  occurring  at the same  sampled  coordinates and  reaching 

comparable magnitudes . By contrast,  L2  pre -readers showed  a broadly similar spatial 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

profile,  but English -word responses were weaker than Chinese -word responses  at the 

shared peak locations , resulting in less pronounced English -word  selectivity. Th es e

findings  suggest that L2 reading recruits  the same general VWFA territory as L1 

processing.  Importantly, this regional alignment was accompanied by stable L1 -

evoked responses across groups , consistent with  the  Overlay  Model .

Fig.  2. Category -selective activation gradients in the left visual cortex.  (A)  Lateral –medial  axis in the 

left visual cortex examined at fixed coordinates (y =  –57, z =  –12) with x ranging from  –57 to  –21. (B)  Beta 

values along the  lateral –medial  axis for English words (violet), Chinese words (green), faces (red), and 

houses (yellow)  versus fixation  for the three groups. (C) Word selectivity along the  lateral –medial  axis for 

English words (left) and Chinese words (right). Line styles denote the three groups: gray dashed for pre -

readers, gray solid for beginning readers, and black solid for advanced readers. (D) Posterior -anterior axis 

examined at fixed coordinates (x  = –45, z =  –12) with y ranging from  –72 to  –24.  (E)  Beta  values for each 

category along the posterior -anterior axis for  the  three groups. (F) Word selectivity along the posterior -

anterior axis for English words (left) and Chinese words (right). 

3. 3 Individual -level analyses: Cross -run responses in the most 

responsive VWFA voxels 

To complement the group -level and ROI -based analyses, which assume consistent 

functional localization across children, we examined cross -language responses within 

the VWFA at the individual level. Using a cross -run selection -extraction procedure, we 

identi fied for each child the VWFA voxels most responsive to English and Chinese 

words and extracted independent beta estimates for both scripts from these voxel sets. 

This analysis tested whether L2 responses increased with L2 literacy experience within 

individ ually defined top -responsive VWFA voxels, and whether this increase was 

accompanied by any reduction in native -script responses. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

In English top -10% voxels, English responses increased across groups, whereas 

Chinese responses remained relatively stable ( Fig. 3B ). The 2 × 3 mixed -design 

ANOVA revealed a significant Script × Group interaction,  F(2,  55) = 3.39,  p = .041,  ηp²

= .11. Within -group paired comparisons  showe d that only L2 pre -readers showed a 

significant script difference, with  lower  English  than Chinese  responses.  Script -specific 

one -way ANOVAs showed a significant group effect for English beta,  F(2,  55) = 4.68, 

p = .013,  η² = .1 5, with lower English responses in L2 pre -readers than in the two 

reader groups. Consistent with this pattern, the linear trend analysis showed a 

significant positive  linear trend in English beta estimates across the ordered L2 literacy 

groups , b = 0.30,  t(56) = 2.6 2, p = .011. In contrast, Chinese beta did not show a 

significant group effect, nor a significant linear trend. 

In Chinese top -10% voxels, the 2 × 3 mixed -design ANOVA did not reveal a significant 

Script × Group interaction. Script -specific analyses showed that English beta did not 

differ significantly across groups, although the linear trend analysis  revealed a

significant positive linear trend across the ordered L2 literacy groups , b = 0.2 3, t(56) = 

2.3 2, p = .024. Chinese beta showed no significant group effect, and no significant 

linear trend .

Together, these individual -level analyses provide converging evidence that L2 literacy 

acquisition was not accompanied by a reduction in L1 responses within the VWFA. The 

clearest  group -related difference  was observed in English top -10% voxels, where 

English responses increased from pre -readers to readers while  Chinese responses 

showed no evidence of group differences . In Chinese top -10% voxels, L1 responses 

likewise  showed no significant group difference , and there was no significant Script × 

Group interaction. This pattern supports the Overlay Model, suggesting that the VWFA 

incorporates a newly learned script primarily  through enhanced  L2 responses in 

English -responsive voxels,  without detectable attenuation of native -script responses .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 3. Individual -level characterization of cross -language responses within the VWFA across  L2 

literacy groups . (A) Voxels were ranked separately based on activation strength for the contrasts English 

words >  the mean of faces and houses  and Chinese words >  the mean of faces and houses . The top 10% 

of voxels from each contrast were identified separately, and beta estimates were extracted using a cross -

run procedure. (B) Comparison of two -fold cross -run beta estimates for English ( violet ) and Chinese 

(green) words across the three reading stages within English top -10% and Chinese top -10% voxels. (C) 

Summary of statistical effects, including one -way ANOVA effect sizes for group differences and  linear 

trend slopes across the ordered L2 literacy groups , shown separately for English and Chinese responses. 

Significance levels: * p < .05; n.s., not significant. 

3.4  Representational similarity analysis (RSA) 

To examine whether learning to read L2 shapes the internal representational structure 

of the VWFA beyond differences in activation magnitude, we conducted RSA within 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

this region.  For each participant, a representational similarity matrix  was computed 

based on the  cross -run  correlations between voxel -wise activation patterns evoked by 

the four stimulus categories (English words, Chinese words, faces, and houses) within 

the VWFA  sphere  (Fig.  4A).  We compared within -category similarity (e.g., En –En) with 

the mean between -category similarity (e.g., En –faces/houses) to assess whether the 

VWFA  exhibited robust representations of L1 and L2 words  at each reading stage  (Fig. 

4B, panels a –b), examined how within -category similarity for English and Chinese 

words each  differe d across groups, and compared within -script with cross -script 

similarities to characterize the representational relationship between L1 and L2  (Fig. 

4B, panel c ).

Fig.  4. Representational similarity analyses of word representations in the VWFA.  (A) 

Representational similarity matrix (RSM) showing the mean, across participants, of the pairwise 

correlations between spatial activation patterns evoked by four stimulus categories: English words, 

Chinese words, faces, and houses. Color intensity indica tes the magnitude of similarity (warmer colors = 

higher similarity; cooler colors = lower similarity).  Solid boxes indicate within -category similarities (En -En, 

Ch-Ch), and dashed boxes indicate between -category similarities (En -NonLing, C h-NonLing, En -Ch). En -

NonLing (C h-NonLing) denotes the mean between -category similarity between English (Chinese) words 

and non -linguistic stimuli (faces and houses) . (B) Comparisons of representational similarity in the VWFA. 

Bar plots show mean similarity values for three comparisons: (top) within -English similarity versus English -

non -linguistic similarity, (middle) within -Chinese similarity versus Chinese -non -lingui stic similarity, and 

(bottom)  comparisons among  within -English , within -Chinese, and  English -Chinese similarity. Results are 

shown separately for the three groups differing in L2 experience (pre -, beginning, and advanced readers). 

Significance levels: * pFDR  < .05, ** pFDR  < .01, *** pFDR  < .001 (FDR -corrected paired -sample t -tests). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Comparisons between  within -category similarity and the mean between -category 

similarity for English words (En -En vs En -faces, En -houses) reveale d that  beginning 

and advanced readers exhibited significantly higher within -category similarity 

(beginning readers:  t = 3.96 , pFDR  < .0 01 , Cohen’s  d = 0.91 ; advanced readers:  t = 4.18 ,

pFDR  < .0 01 , Cohen’s  d = 0.96 ), whereas pre -readers did not show a reliable difference 

(Fig. 4B, panel a ). In contrast,  comparisons between  within -category similarity and the 

mean between -category similarity for Chinese words (Ch -Ch vs Ch -faces, Ch -houses) 

showed consistently higher within -Chinese similarity across all  three  groups (pre -

readers:  t = 3.24 , pFDR  < .0 1, Cohen’s  d = 0.73 ; beginning readers:  t = 6.13 , pFDR  < .0 01, 

Cohen’s  d = 1.41 ; advanced readers:  t = 5.38 , pFDR  < . 001, Cohen’s  d = 1.23 ) (Fig. 4B, 

panel b ). For the comparison among within -English, within -Chinese, and English -

Chinese similarity, FDR -corrected pairwise paired -sample t-tests revealed no 

significant differences in any group  (Fig. 4B, panel c ).  One -way ANOVAs further 

showed no significant group effect for within -English similarity  (F(2,  55) = 2.7 8, p = .071, 

η² = .09 ), or within -Chinese similarity  (F(2,  55) = 0.9 1, p = .411,  η² = .03 ). Analyses 

using 6 -mm and 8 -mm -radius spheres centered on the canonical VWFA coordinates 

replicated these findings ( Supplementary Fig. S2 ). 

Taken together, these results  suggest  that  robust L2 word representations emerged 

only in children with L2 reading experience, while  robust L1 word representations were 

evident across all three groups . Within -category similarity for Chinese words did not 

show a significant group effect, with no evidence of L1 word representational decline 

as predicted by the Competing Model.  Although within -category similarity for English 

words did not differ significantly across groups, reliable L2 word representations were 

observed in  L2  beginning and advanced readers, but not in  L2  pre -readers, indicating 

an experience -dependent emergence of L2 word representations within the VWFA. 

3. 5 Supervised machine learning classification 

To assess whether VWFA responses to different stimulus categories could differentiate 

participants with varying levels of L2 reading experience, we conducted supervised 

machine learning analyses  based on run -level GLM -derived  β estimates . Results 

revealed that VWFA activation patterns to English words reliably discriminated 

participants across the three groups , with c lassification accuracies significantly above 

chance for all three models: logistic regression (accuracy = . 44 , p = .0 24 ), support 

vector machine (accuracy = . 46 , p = .00 8), and random forest (accuracy = . 44 , p = .01 9). 

In contrast, classification based on VWFA responses to Chinese words, faces, or 

houses did not exceed chance level in any classifier  (ps  > .1 0). These findings indicate 

that VWFA responses to L2 words change systematically with reading acquisition, 

enabling reliable group discrimination,  whereas responses to L1 words and non -

linguistic categories did not contain sufficient information for above -chance group 

classification . This pattern is consistent with the  Overlay  Model, suggesting that VWFA 

reorganization is driven by emerging L2 word representations rather than reallocation 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

of L1 resources. 

Fig.  5. Classification of L2 literacy stage based on VWFA activation patterns.  (A) Schematic of the 

supervised machine learning pipeline. For each participant, GLM -derived  β estimates  for each stimulus 

category  were extracted from a 6 -mm spherical ROI centered on canonical VWFA coordinates. Voxelwise 

β values from each run formed a feature matrix of size (subjects ×runs) ×voxels, with each sample labeled 

according to L2 proficiency group (pre -readers, beginning readers, advanced readers). Three classifiers 

(logistic regression, support vector machine with radial basis function kernel, and random forest)  were 

evaluated using a five -fold StratifiedGroupKFold  cross -validation procedure, which ensured that (i) 

samples from the same participant were not split across training and test sets, and (ii) class proportions 

were approximately balanced across folds.  Classification accuracy was computed by aggregating 

predictions across all folds.  Statistical significance was assessed using permutation testing with 

participant -level label shuffling. The full cross -validation procedure was repeated 1,000 times to generate 

a null distribution of classification accuracies.  (B) Classification performance based on VWFA activation 

patterns for  each stimulus category . Blue  histograms  represent the null distribution of classification 

accuracies from 1 ,000 permutations of group labels. The  vertical  red line indicates the observed     

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint classification accuracy. Significance levels: * p< .05, ** p< .01; n.s. ,not significant.

3.6 Analyses of other language -related regions 

To characterize how L2 reading experience shapes the functional organization of the 

left spoken -language network, we investigated these language -related ROIs (STS, 

STG, IP S, MFG, see  Fig. 6A ) using the analytical framework established for the VWFA, 

which combines univariate activation, RSA, and supervised classification .

Univariate analyses revealed no significant group effects for any stimulus category in 

any of the four ROIs ( ps  > .05) , indicating no reliable differences in mean activation 

magnitude among L2 pre -readers, beginning readers, and advanced readers. 

Descriptive patterns across the four ROIs suggested region -specific differences in 

English -word responses associated with L2 reading experience  (Fig. 6B, left panel ).

RSA analyses revealed that no robust L2 word representations were observed in pre -

readers or beginning readers after FDR correction, as their within -English similarity did 

not exceed English -non -linguistic similarity in any ROI. In advanced readers, by 

con trast, within -English similarity exceeded English -non -linguistic similarity in the MFG 

(t = 3.48,  pFDR  < .05, Cohen’s  d = 0.80), STG ( t = 3.38,  pFDR  < .05, Cohen’s  d = 0.77), 

STS ( t = 3.38,  pFDR  < .05, Cohen’s  d = 0.77), and IPS ( t = 4.41,  pFDR  < .05, Cohen’s  d

= 1.01), indicating that robust L2 word representations  in language -related ROIs  were 

detectable only  in advanced readers  (Fig. 6B, middle panel ).  In  addition , n o ROI 

showed significantly greater within -English than English -Chinese similarity after FDR 

correction.  Finally, supervised classification analyses demonstrated that  random -forest 

classification based on MFG patterns exceeded chance  (accuracy = .54,  p = .008 ), 

whereas classification using logistic regression or an SVM did not . More broadly, none 

of the language -related ROIs could consistently decode L2 reading stages across all 

three classifiers ( Fig. 6B, right panel ). These decoding results suggest that, compared 

to the visual cortex, these spoken -language regions generally lack sufficient group -

discriminative information to  be sensitive to variations in L2 reading experience .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig.  6. ROI activation, RSA, and supervised machine learning classification analyses of left 

spoken -language -related  regions.  (A) Illustration of the f our  spoken -language -related ROIs in the left 

front al,  parietal , and temporal  cortex , including  the left MFG,  IPS, STG,  and  STS,  defined based on prior 

review and  meta -analyses of reading. (B) Results are organized into three panels, with each row 

corresponding to one ROI and each column representing a distinct analysis.  Left panel : Univariate 

activation for four categories (English words, Chinese words, faces, houses) across the three groups. 

Middle panel : Comparisons of representational similarity separately for three groups. Bar plots show 

mean similarity values for two comparisons: within -English similarity versus English -non -linguistic 

similarity and English -Chinese similarity.  Right panel : Classification performance for three classifiers 

trained to predict L2 group membership from English -word activation patterns. Blue  histogram s represent 

the null distribution of classification accuracies from 1 ,000  permutation s with participant -level label 

shuffling . The  vertical  red line indicates the observed  accuracy  aggregated across  cross -validation  folds .

Significance levels: * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4. Discussion 

The present study investigated how the VWFA reorganizes to  incorporate  a structurally 

distinct second writing system during early L2 literacy acquisition. Using a cross -

sectional design, native Mandarin -speaking children were divided into three groups by 

L2 experience:  L2 pre -readers, beginning readers, and  advanced readers. Whereas 

pre -readers showed  little evidence of robust L2 -word selectivity , beginning readers 

exhibited reliable L2 -word selectivity  within the same general VWFA territory already 

responsive to L1 words , with this pattern remaining stable in advanced readers. 

Representational similarity analyses  further revealed robust L2 word representations 

in beginning and advanced readers, but not in pre -readers, indicating that L2 literacy 

acquisition drives the integration of L2 word representations into a VWFA region 

already committed to L1 word processing . To characterize the nature of this 

reorganization, we first examined how L2 -selective responses, defined as greater 

activation to L2 relative to other non -linguistic categories, arose in the VWFA. We found 

that t he selective  responses were driven by increased activation to L2 stimuli rather 

than by decreased activation to L1 or other non -linguistic categories. We then 

assessed whether the emergence of L2 word representations disrupted pre -existing 

L1 word representations and  found no evidence of disruption, indicating that L2 

acquisition did not degrade prior L1 responses. Converging evidence from machine 

learning analyses further revealed that only L2 responses, but n ot  L1 or other category 

responses,  reliably discriminated among the three L2 literacy groups . Taken together, 

these findings indicate that early L2 literacy acquisition prompts the incorporation of 

representations of a newly learned script into an already specialized VWFA without 

measurable competition with either pre -existing L1 word representat ions or non -

linguistic category representations (e.g., faces, houses), thus supporting an  Overlay 

Model. 

4.1  Neural reorganization induced by  learning  to read 

The present study extends prior work on native -script acquisition to the domain of L2 

reading, revealing similarly reorganization of the VWFA in response to a newly learned 

script. This parallels evidence from native -script learning demonstrating that even  a

few weeks to months of reading instruction can induce measurable changes in the 

ventral occipitotemporal cortex  (Brem et al., 2010; Dehaene -Lambertz et al., 2018; 

Yeatman et al., 2024) . Consistent with this, our previous study comparing  6-year -old 

L1 pre -readers,  6-year -old  beginning readers, and  9-year -old  advanced readers 

demonstrated that such reorganization is driven by reading experience rather than 

maturation  (Feng et al., 2022) . While a growing body of research has examined the 

neural correlates of L2 reading acquisition, particularly how the VWFA supports the 

learning of a second writing system, these studies have focused predominantly on 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

adults learning artificial orthographies  (Martin et al., 2019; Moore et al., 2014; Xue et 

al., 2006) , leaving it largely unknown how the developing brain incorporates L2 word 

representations into the existing reading network. The present findings directly address 

this gap, showing that in children with well -established L1 word representations  in the 

VWFA , this region remains sufficiently plastic to support experience -dependent 

reorganization for L2  literacy acquisition . Together , these findings suggest that 

acquiring a native script does not exhaust the brain ’s plasticity; rather, the VWFA 

retains the capacity for continued experience -dependent reorganization in response to 

additional writing systems  during development .

4. 2 Absence of neural competition between L1 and newly acquired L2 in 

the VWFA 

A key prediction of the Competing Model , informed by  the  cortical recycling hypothesis ,

is  that learning to read a new script requires the reallocation of cortical resources, 

potentially encroaching upon territory previously dedicated to pre -existing visual 

categories  (Dehaene & Cohen, 2007) . In the context of L2 literacy acquisition, this view 

predicts that the emergence of L2 responses would trigger neural competition, 

degrading or displacing pre -existing L1 responses within the shared cortical territory of 

the VWFA . Our findings, however, provide no evidence in support of this competitive 

encroachment account. Instead, the VWFA appears to incorporate L2 print  processing 

without measurably disrupting pre -existing L1 responses or representations, 

suggesting that intra -category coexistence, rather than competition, characterizes the 

early stages of L2 literacy acquisition .

First, the incorporation of L2 script into the VWFA did not occur at the expense of 

native -script processing. Both univariate activation and RSA revealed that L1 -word 

responses remained remarkably stable across all three groups. Specifically, the 

magnitude  of L1 -selective activation did not decrease from L2 pre -readers to advanced 

readers, and intra -category pattern similarity for L1 words showed no evidence of 

degradation. Crucially,  classification based on L1 activation patterns did not reliably 

distinguish among the three groups . This clear preservation of L1 sensitivity directly 

argues agains t the notion of neural competition between the two writing systems within 

the VWFA, indicating that the existing neural substrate possesses sufficient capacity 

to incorporate an additional, structurally distinct script through an overlay  mechanism 

rather than  a competing one .

These findings stand in contrast to prior evidence implicating competitive dynamics in 

reading -related cortical organization.  In studies of illiterate adults , higher reading ability 

has been associated with a modest reduction in face responsivity within the left 

fusiform gyrus  (Dehaene et al., 2010) . Similarly, struggling young readers exhibit lower 

word selectivity in the VWFA not due to diminished responses to print, but due to a 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

failure to suppress competing responses to non -linguistic objects  (Kubota et al., 2019) .

More recently, longitudinal evidence has demonstrated that increases in word 

selectivity during childhood are directly coupled with decreases in limb selectivity within 

the ventral temporal cortex, suggesting that limb -selective cortex is progressively 

repurposed for orthographic processing  (Nordt et al., 2021) . Going beyond these 

cross -category competitions, our study investigated whether a parallel competitive 

dynamic exists when acquiring a new script. We found no such displacement within 

the VWFA. The robust increase in L2 -word activation observed in beginni ng and 

advanced readers was accompanied by stable responses to Chinese words, and 

activation profiles for non -linguistic categories within the VWFA remained  stable  across 

groups.  This absence of competition may partly reflect the fact that writing systems, 

despite their surface diversity, share a common  set of basic  vi sual features, such as 

lines and angles at particular junctions, that were culturally selected to match contours 

recurring in natural scenes  (Changizi et al., 2006) . This shared low -level structure may 

allow the neural circuitry recruited for L1 print processing to accommodate a second, 

visually distinct script with minimal need for additional resources. 

Taken together, our cross -sectional findings suggest that when an additional script is 

introduced after the L1 reading network is already established, it seamlessly overlays 

onto the existing word -selective architecture of the VWFA without triggering corti cal 

encroachment upon existing L1 representations. Although the absence of limb stimuli 

in the current paradigm precludes a direct voxel -level test of the limb -displacement 

hypothesis (see Limitations), the overall stability of both L1 and non -linguistic c ategory 

representations  within  the  VWFA  strongly implies that L2 print exploits pre -existing 

orthographic channels carved out during L1 acquisition,  reduc ing the need for further 

competitive reallocation of the broader visual cortex. 

4. 3 L2 literacy acquisition recruits the existing VWFA territory: 

accommodation and assimilation 

In addition to asking whether  the  VWFA would undergo systematic modifications as 

children begin acquiring a second script , we further examined the  nature of this cortical 

reorganization . We  first  examined how this reorganization  was  spatially structured 

within the VWFA . A key prediction of the Overlay Model is that L2 print may recruit the 

same cortical territory already tuned to the native script. Consistent with this prediction, 

spatial activation patterns showed that Chinese words consistently evoked stronger 

responses  than non -linguistic categories within  the  left ventral visual cortex across all 

three groups, indicating that selective cortical responses to the native script were 

already well established. Fine -grained moving -window ROI analyses further revealed 

that English -word responses near the VWFA were we ak in  L2 pre -readers , but grew 

and peaked within the same  general  territory once children acquired English reading 

experience, giving rise to L2 responses that closely aligned with L1 responses in both 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

magnitude and spatial location. Thus, the critical spatial change associated with L2 

literacy acquisition was the emergence of L2 -word selectivity within pre -existing VWFA 

territory despite already robust native -script specialization. Although this  regional 

alignment  does not imply exact voxel -by -voxel identity, the overall pattern supports the 

view that L2 is spatially incorporated within a shared cortical territory. 

This spatial pattern is consistent with adult bilingual studies showing that two writing 

systems can engage overlapping occipitotemporal regions, including studies of 

English –Hebrew, Chinese –Korean, and Chinese –English bilingual readers  (Bai et al., 

2011; Baker et al., 2007; Wong et al., 2009) . The present study extends these adult 

findings by showing that, even from the earliest stages of L2 literacy acquisition, a 

structurally distinct writing system is incorporated into the existing VWFA territory rather 

than assigned to a separate cortical  substrate. This interpretation is further supported 

by evidence from training studies, where adults learning artificial logographic systems 

likewise recruit neural territory previously specialized for native -script literacy  (Martin 

et al., 2019) .

Moreover , in the literature on bilingual reading, assimilation and accommodation have 

been proposed to account for how the brain adapts to L2 learning  (Perfetti et al., 2007) .

When L2 is similar to L1, the brain recruits the same network already established for 

L1 reading, a process termed assimilation, as demonstrated in fMRI studies of 

English –Korean bilinguals , in which both languages use alphabetic writing systems 

(Kim et al., 2016) . When L2 is  substantially  different from L1, the brain recruits 

additional or distinct regions to support L2 -specific processing demands, a process 

termed accommodation, as suggested in studies of English L1 participants learning 

Chinese as L2, including recruitment of the right f usiform region, middle occipital gyri, 

and middle frontal gyrus  (Liu et al., 2007; Nelson et al., 2009) . The substantial 

structural differences between Chinese and English might lead one to predict 

accommodation in Chinese –English bilingual readers. Our results, however, reveal 

that the VWFA specifically follows an assimilation pattern, with comparable responses 

to both L1 and L2 observed in beginning and advanced readers. We argue that this 

reflects the core functional role  of the VWFA: although Chinese and English differ 

substantially at many levels of linguistic representation, both writing systems share the 

fundamental demand of orthographic processing. Prior research has consistently 

shown that the VWFA is sensitive to o rthographic structure in both languages, as 

evidenced by a shared lexicality gradient whereby responses systematically increase 

as stimuli more closely approximate real words  (Zhan et al., 2023) . Since  this 

orthographic processing demand is common to both scripts, the VWFA is well 

positioned to assimilate L2 within its existing L1 framework, regardless of the broader 

structural differences between the two writing systems. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4.4  Beyond the VWFA: gradual integration of L2 into the broader spoken -

language network 

In the present study, we applied the same analytical framework used for the VWFA —

incorporating univariate activation, RSA, and supervised classification —to examine 

how regions within the left spoken -language network (including the MFG, IP S, STG, 

and STS)  were  recruited during L2 reading acquisition. In contrast to the  reorganization 

observed in the VWFA, these spoken -language regions exhibited a less immediate 

and more heterogeneous L2 -sensitive profile.  Descriptively,  across nearly all groups, 

these regions showed a general tuning for written language, responding more strongly 

to words than to non -linguistic stimuli.  English words  also  tended to elicit weaker 

activation than Chinese words across most groups and ROIs, suggesting that the 

spoken -language network remained more strongly engaged by the native script .

Moreo ver, whereas robust L2 word representations emerged in the VWFA  in beginning 

reader s, comparable representations  in these speech -related regions arose 

predominantly in advanced readers, suggesting a prolonged trajectory ( Fig. 6B ). 

Aligning with this  more gradual pattern , supervised classification revealed that spoken -

language regions generally lacked sufficient group -discriminative information to 

reliably decode L2 reading stages. 

This asymmetry  likely  reflect s the sequential process through which a newly learned 

writing system becomes integrated into the reading network. The VWFA is directly 

engaged by visual print exposure and orthographic learning, and may therefore 

develop sensitivity to L2 literacy experien ce relatively early  (Brem et al., 2010; 

Dehaene -Lambertz et al., 2018) . By contrast, spoken -language -related regions may 

rely on the gradual coupling of orthographic representations with phonological, 

articulatory, and lexical -semantic processes, which likely require more extended 

reading experience to consolidate  (Dehaene -Lambertz et al., 2018) . The present 

findings therefore extend prior evidence that reading acquisition reshapes both visual 

and spoken -language systems, now in the context of L2 literacy, and further suggest 

that these two components do not reorganize in tandem. Specifically, L2  print appears 

to be initially incorporated within the VWFA, whereas the functional engagement of 

broader language circuits unfolds more graduall y. 

Crucially, the protracted  nature of this neural integration may be profoundly shaped by 

the characteristics of the L2  writing system . This notion is consistent with previous 

cross -linguistic evidence  showing that the degree of orthographic transparency 

modulates the timing and pace of this integration . More specifically, in a transparent 

language like Polish, print –speech convergence was observed  at  an early stage of 

reading acquisition  (Dębska et al., 2024) , while in an opaque language like English, 

the convergence was observed in a more gradual fashion  (Chyl et al., 2021) . Although 

these findings were originally obtained in the context of L1 acquisition, a parallel 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

pattern may extend to L2 learners, wherein both the orthographic opacity of the L2 and 

the typological distance between the L1 and L2 (here, Chinese and English) jointly 

shape the pace at which visual print becomes coordinated with the spoken -language 

netw ork .

4.5  Li mitations 

Several limitations of the present study need to be considered. First, the cross -

sectional design employed here precludes tracking individual developmental 

trajectories over time and limits our ability to make inferences about within -subject 

changes in VWF A organization during L2 literacy acquisition. Longitudinal designs 

would be essential to directly capture these dynamic developmental processes. 

Second, while the three groups were carefully matched in age and general cognitive 

ability as measured by Rave n’s Standard Progressive Matrices and differed primarily 

in their English literacy experience, broader environmental factors such as 

socioeconomic status (SES) and home literacy environment were not assessed. These 

factors  may  contribute to individual differences in L2 literacy acquisition  (Noble et al., 

2006)  and should be systematically considered in future work. Third, the passive 

viewing task minimized task difficulty differences across groups and was suitable for 

children with limited English reading experience. However,  this approach could not 

ensure  equivalent  cognitive load across all groups and categories.  Furthermore , recent 

longitudinal studies have proposed that word representations compete for cortical 

territory previously involved in processing other visual categories, such as limb images 

(Kubota et al., 2024; Nordt et al., 2021) . As limb stimuli were not included in the present 

study, this hypothesis could not be directly tested. Future studies incorporating such 

visual categories would provide valuable insights into the neural competition between 

word and limb representations ac ross different stages of both L1 and L2 reading 

acquisition.  Finally, f uture research could benefit from  7T  fMRI at millimeter -scale 

spatial resolution to more precisely characterize how L1 and L2 processing patterns 

evolve with increasing L2 experience .

4.6 Conclusions 

In the current study, we examined the systematic modifications and the underlying 

nature of cortical reorganization in the VWFA during early L2 script acquisition . We 

found that L2 -word selectivity was absent in  L2 pre -readers but emerged robustly in 

beginning readers, while L1 -word selectivity remained stable throughout. 

Representational similarity analysis further revealed that robust L2 word 

representations within the VWFA emerged only after children began learnin g to read 

L2, while L1 word representations remained stable across all three groups. Finally, 

supervised machine learning classifiers reliably discriminated among the three L2 

literacy groups based on L2 activation patterns but not L1 activation patterns,  providing 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

no support for  the Competing Model ’s prediction of competitive neural reallocation 

away from L1. Together, these findings support the Overlay Model, demonstrating that 

the VWFA incorporates a new writing system within its existing cortical resources 

without compromising native -script proces sing .

Reference s

Bai, J., Shi, J., Jiang, Y., He, S., & Weng, X. (2011).  Chinese and Korean characters engage the 

same visual word form area in proficient early Chinese –Korean bilinguals . PLOS ONE ,

6(7), e22765. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0022765 

Baker, C. I., Liu, J., Wald, L. L., Kwong, K. K., Benner, T., & Kanwisher, N. (2007). Visual 

word processing and experiential origins of functional selectivity in human extrastriate 

cortex.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 104 (21), 9087 –9092. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0703300104 

Brem, S., Bach, S., Kucian, K., Kujala, J. V.,  Guttorm, T.  K., Martin, E., Lyytinen, H.,  Brandeis, 

D., & Richardson, U.  (2010). Brain sensitivity to print emerges when children learn letter –

speech sound correspondences.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 107 (17), 

7939 –7944 . https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0904402107 

Centanni, T. M., Norton, E. S., Park, A., Beach, S. D., Halverson, K., Ozernov -Palchik, O., 

Gaab, N., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2018). Early development of letter specialization in left 

fusiform is associated with better word reading and smaller fusiform face are a. 

Developmental Science , 21 (5), e12658. https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12658 

Changizi, M. A., Zhang, Q., Ye, H., & Shimojo, S. (2006). The  structures of  letters and  symbols 

throughout  human  history  are  selected to  match  those  found in  objects in  natural  scenes. 

The American Naturalist , 167 (5), E117 –E139. https://doi.org/10.1086/502806 

Chyl, K., Kossowski, B., Dębska, A., Łuniewska, M., Banaszkiewicz, A., Żelechowska, A., 

Frost, S. J., Mencl, W. E., Wypych, M., Marchewka, A., Pugh, K. R., & Jednoróg, K. 

(2018). Prereader to beginning reader: Changes induced by reading acquisition in prin t

and speech brain networks.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry , 59 (1), 76 –87. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12774 

Chyl, K., Kossowski, B., Wang, S., Dębska, A., Łuniewska, M., Marchewka, A., Wypych, M., 

van der  Bunt, M., Mencl, W., Pugh, K., & Jednoróg, K. (2021). The brain signature of 

emerging reading in two contrasting languages.  NeuroImage , 225 , 117503. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117503 

Dębska, A. M., Wang, J., Dzięgiel -Fivet, G. K., Chyl, K. M., Wójcik, M. P., Jednoróg, K. M., 

& Booth, J. R. (2024). The development of orthography and phonology coupling in the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ventral occipito -temporal cortex and its relation to reading.  Journal of Experimental 

Psychology: General , 153 (2), 293 –306. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0001495 

Dehaene, S., & Cohen, L. (2007). Cultural  recycling of  cortical  maps.  Neuron , 56 (2), 384 –398. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2007.10.004 

Dehaene, S., Pegado, F., Braga, L. W., Ventura, P., Filho, G. N., Jobert, A., Dehaene -Lambertz, 

G., Kolinsky, R., Morais, J., & Cohen, L. (2010). How  learning to  read  changes the  cortical 

networks for  vision and  language.  Science , 330 (6009), 1359 –1364. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1194140 

Dehaene -Lambertz, G., Monzalvo, K., & Dehaene, S. (2018). The emergence of the visual word 

form: Longitudinal evolution of category -specific ventral visual areas during reading 

acquisition.  PLOS Biology , 16 (3), e2004103. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2004103 

Feng, X., Altarelli, I., Monzalvo, K., Ding, G., Ramus, F., Shu, H., Dehaene, S., Meng, X., & 

Dehaene -Lambertz, G. (2020). A universal reading network and its modulation by writing 

system and reading ability in French and Chinese children.  eLife , 9, e54591. 

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.54591 

Feng, X., Monzalvo, K., Dehaene, S., & Dehaene -Lambertz, G. (2022). Evolution of reading 

and face circuits during the first three years of reading acquisition.  NeuroImage , 259 ,

119394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119394 

Hervais -Adelman, A., Kumar, U., Mishra, R. K., Tripathi, V. N., Guleria, A., Singh, J. P., Eisner, 

F., & Huettig, F. (2019). Learning to read recycles visual cortical networks without 

destruction.  Science Advances , 5(9), eaax0262. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aax0262 

Houdé, O., Rossi, S., Lubin, A., & Joliot, M. (2010). Mapping numerical processing, reading, 

and executive functions in the developing brain: An fMRI meta -analysis of 52 studies 

including 842 children.  Developmental Science , 13 (6), 876 –885. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467 -7687.2009.00938.x 

Jacoby, N., & Fedorenko, E. (2018). Discourse -level comprehension engages medial frontal 

theory of  mind brain regions even for expository texts.  Language, Cognition and 

Neuros cience , 35 (6), 780 –796 . https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2018.1525494 

Kim, S. Y., Qi, T., Feng, X., Ding, G., Liu, L., & Cao, F. (2016). How does language distance 

between L1 and L2 affect the L2 brain network? An fMRI study of Korean –Chinese –

English trilinguals.  NeuroImage , 129 , 25 –39. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.11.068 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Kubota, E. C., Joo, S. J., Huber, E., & Yeatman, J. D. (2019). Word selectivity in high -level 

visual cortex and reading skill.  Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience , 36 , 100593. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2018.09.003 

Kubota, E., Grill -Spector, K., & Nordt, M. (2024). Rethinking cortical recycling in ventral 

temporal cortex.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 28 (1), 8–17. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2023.09.006 

Liu, Y., Dunlap, S., Fiez, J., & Perfetti, C.  A.  (2007). Evidence for neural accommodation to a 

writing system following learning.  Human Brain Mapping , 28 (11), 1223 –1234 .

https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20356 

Martin, A., Schurz, M., Kronbichler, M., & Richlan, F. (2015).  Reading in the brain of children 

and adults: A meta‐analysis of 40 functional magnetic resonance imaging studies . Human 

Brain Mapping , 36 (5), 1963 –1981.  https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22749 

Martin, L., Durisko, C., Moore, M. W., Coutanche, M. N., Chen, D., & Fiez, J. A. (2019). The 

VWFA  is the  home of  orthographic  learning  when  houses  are  used as  letters.  eN euro , 6(1), 

ENEURO.0425 -17.2019. https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0425 -17.2019 

Meng, X., You, H., Song, M., Desroches, A. S., Wang, Z., Wei, N., Tian, M., Gaab, N., & Ding, 

G. (2016). Neural deficits in auditory phonological processing in Chinese children with 

English reading impairment.  Bilingualism: Language and Cognition , 19 (2), 331 –346. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728915000073 

Mirsky, A. F., Anthony, B. J., Duncan, C. C., Ahearn, M. B., & Kellam, S. G. (1991). Analysis 

of the elements of attention: A neuropsychological approach.  Neuropsychology Review ,

2(2), 109 –145. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01109051 

Monzalvo, K., & Dehaene -Lambertz, G. (2013). How reading acquisition changes children’s 

spoken language network.  Brain and Language , 127 (3), 356 –365. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2013.10.009 

Monzalvo, K., Fluss, J., Billard, C., Dehaene, S., &  Dehaene -Lambertz, G.  (2012). Cortical 

networks for vision and language in dyslexic and normal children of variable socio -

economic status.  NeuroImage , 61 (1), 258 –274. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.02.035 

Moore, M. W., Durisko, C., Perfetti, C. A., & Fiez, J. A. (2014). Learning to  read an  alphabet 

of  human  faces  produces  left -lateralized  training  effects in the  fusiform  gyrus.  Journal of 

Cognitive Neuroscience , 26 (4), 896 –913. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00506 

Nelson, J. R., Liu, Y., Fiez, J., & Perfetti, C. A. (2009). Assimilation and accommodation 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

patterns in ventral occipitotemporal cortex in learning a second writing system.  Human 

Brain Mapping , 30 (3), 810 –820. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20551 

Noble, K. G., Wolmetz, M. E., Ochs, L. G., Farah, M. J., &  McCandliss , B. D.  (2006). Brain –

behavior relationships in reading acquisition are modulated by socioeconomic factors. 

Developmental Scien ce , 9(6), 642 –654 . https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467 -7687.2006.00542.x 

Nordt, M., Gomez, J., Natu, V. S., Rezai, A. A., Finzi, D., Kular, H., & Grill -Spector, K. (2021). 

Cortical recycling in high -level visual cortex during childhood development.  Nature 

Human Behaviour , 5(12), 1686 –1697. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562 -021 -01141 -5

Nordt, M., Gomez, J., Natu, V. S., Rezai, A. A., Finzi, D., Kular, H., & Grill -Spector, K. (2023). 

Longitudinal development of category representations in ventral temporal cortex predicts 

word and face recognition.  Nature Communications , 14 (1), 8010. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -023 -43146 -w

Pan, J., McBride -Chang, C., Shu, H., Liu, H., Zhang, Y., & Li, H. (2011). What is in the naming? 

A 5 -year longitudinal study of early rapid naming and phonological sensitivity in relation 

to subsequent reading skills in both native Chinese and English as a  second language. 

Journal of Educational Psychology , 103 (4), 897 –908. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0024344 

Perfetti, C. A., Liu, Y., Fiez, J., Nelson, J.,  Bolger, D. J.,  & Tan , L.-H.  (2007).  Reading in two 

writing systems: Accommodation and assimilation of the brain’s reading network. 

Bilingualism: Language and Cognition , 10 (2), 131 –146 .

https://doi.org/10.1017/s1366728907002891 

Romanovska, L., & Bonte, M. (2021). How  learning to  read  changes the  listening  brain. 

Frontiers in Psychology , 12 , 726882. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.726882 

van  der Mark, S., Klaver, P., Bucher, K., Maurer, U., Schulz, E., Brem, S., Martin, E., & 

Brandeis, D. (2011). The left occipitotemporal system in reading: Disruption of focal fMRI 

connectivity to left inferior frontal and inferior parietal language areas in ch ildren with 

dyslexia.  NeuroImage , 54 (3), 2426 –2436. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.10.002 

Vinckier, F., Dehaene, S., Jobert, A., Dubus, J. P., Sigman, M., & Cohen, L. (2007). Hierarchical 

coding of  letter  strings in the  ventral  stream:  Dissecting the  inner  organization of the  visual 

word -form  system.  Neuron , 55 (1), 143 –156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2007.05.031 

Vogel, A. C., Petersen, S. E., & Schlaggar, B. L. (2012). The  left  occipitotemporal  cortex  does 

not  show  preferential  activity for  words.  Cerebral Cortex , 22 (12), 2715 –2732. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhr295 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Walenski, M., Europa, E., Caplan, D., & Thompson, C. K. (2019). Neural networks for sentence 

comprehension and production: An ALE‐based meta‐analysis of neuroimaging studies. 

Human Brain Mapping , 40 (8), 2275 –2304. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.24523 

Wong, A. C. -N., Jobard, G., James, K. H., James, T. W., &  Gauthier , I. (2009). Expertise with 

characters in alphabetic and nonalphabetic writing systems engage overlapping occipito -

temporal areas.  Cognitive Neuropsychol ogy , 26 (1), 111 –127 .

https://doi.org/10.1080/02643290802340972 

Woodcock, R. W. (1998).  Woodcock  Reading  Mastery  Tests –Revised.  American Guidance 

Service. 

Xu, M., Baldauf, D., Chang, C. Q., Desimone, R., &  Tan , L. H.  (2017). Distinct distributed 

patterns of neural activity are associated with two languages in the bilingual brain.  Science 

Advan ces , 3(7), e1603309 . https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1603309 

Xue, G., Chen, C., Jin, Z., & Dong, Q. (2006). Language experience shapes fusiform activation 

when processing a logographic artificial language: An fMRI training study.  NeuroImage ,

31 (3), 1315 –1326 . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.11.055 

Yan, C. -G., Wang, X. -D., Zuo, X. -N., & Zang, Y. -F. (2016). DPABI: Data  processing &  analysis 

for (resting -state)  brain  imaging.  Neuroinformatics , 14 (3), 339 –351. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s12021 -016 -9299 -4

Yeatman, J. D., McCloy, D. R., Caffarra, S., Clarke, M. D., Ender, S., Gijbels, L., Joo, S. J., 

Kubota, E. C., Kuhl, P. K., Larson, E., O’Brien, G., Peterson, E. R., Takada, M. E., & 

Taulu, S. (2024). Reading instruction causes changes in category -selectiv e visual cortex. 

Brain Research Bulletin , 212 , 110958. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2024.110958 

You, H., Gaab, N., Wei, N., Cheng -Lai, A., Wang, Z., Jian, J., Song, M., Meng, X., & Ding, G. 

(2011). Neural deficits in second language reading: fMRI evidence from Chinese children 

with English reading impairment.  NeuroImage , 57 (3), 760 –770. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.12.003 

Yu, X., Raney, T., Perdue, M. V., Zuk, J.,  Ozernov -Palchik , O., Becker , B. L. C.,  Raschle , N. 

M., & Gaab, N.  (2018). Emergence of the neural network underlying phonological 

processing from the prereading to the emergent reading stage: A longitudinal study. 

Human Brain Mapping , 39 (5), 2047 –2063 . https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.23985 

Zhan, M., Pallier, C., Agrawal, A., Dehaene, S., & Cohen, L. (2023). Does the visual word form 

area split in bilingual readers? A millimeter -scale 7 -T fMRI study.  Science Advances , 9(14), 

eadf6140. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adf6140 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Zhang, H. -C., & Wang, X. -P. (1989). Standardization research on Raven ’s Standard Progressive 

Matrices in China.  Acta Psychologica Sinica, 21 (2), 3 –11. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.739038 doi: bioRxiv preprint